Preface   ix — xiv 

Ch.  I.           General  Introduction 1 

Ch.  II.          The  popular  Rigveda 22 

Appendix  I.     The  linguistic  evidence  of  date      .         .  28 

Appendix  II.     Doubtful  hymns  and  fragments    .         .  41 

Ch.  III.        Rearrangement  of  the  Rigveda  proper  ...  47 

Ch.  IV.        Sandhi 70 

Ch.  V.          Syllabic  restoration 81 

Ch.  VI.        Quantitative  restoration 108 

Ch.  VII.      Dimeter  verse 149 

Ch.  VIII.     Trimeter  verse 175 

Ch.  IX.        The  less  usual  metres— Stanzas  and  strophes     .  228 

Appendix  III.     The  various  forms  of  the  stanza         .  244 

Ch.  X.          General  conclusions 250 

Appendix  IV.     Table  of  hymns 269 

Ch.  XI.        Metrical  Commentary 289 

Corrigenda  and  Addenda 326 

Indices  : 

Index  of  Subjects 327 

Sanskrit  Index         .         .         .         .                  .         .         .  331 


PREFACE 


THE  Rigveda  is  not  a  book,  but  a  library  and  a  literature.  Before 
its  contents  can  be  appreciated,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should 
be  methodically  arranged.  We  cannot  determine  with  any  exactness 
by  external  evidence  the  date,  the  locality,  or  the  personality  of  the 
authors :  we  are  therefore  thrown  back  upon  the  poems  themselves 
for  our  knowledge  on  these  points ;  and  the  internal  evidence  lends 
itself  most  readily  to  an  enquiry  into  the  relative  date  of  the 
different  hymns. 

Almost  all  western  students  of  the  Rigveda  have  perceived  that 
the  Rigveda  contains  a  number  of  poems  which  by  their  special 
characteristics  in  language,  subject,  and  metre  are  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  main  body  of  the  hymns,  and  to  be  associated  instead  with 
the  poems  of  the  Atharvaveda.  These  poems  have  generally  been 
described  as  'later  additions  to  the  Rigveda,'  and  in  my  opinion  this 
description  is  correct.  Since  however  Professor  Maurice  Bloomfield 
in  his  work  on  the  Atharvaveda  (Strassburg,  1899)  questions  this  view, 
I  have  not  thought  it  right  to  take  it  for  granted,  but  have  adopted 
from  him  the  title  '  popular  Rigveda '  for  these  poems. 

My  first  task  in  this  work  is  accordingly  to  delimit  the  '  popular 
Rigveda,'  which  has  generally  been  vaguely  described  as  consisting  of 
certain  hymns  appended  to  the  first  nine  Mandalas,  and  the  majority  of 
those  of  Mandala  x.  For  this  purpose  an  examination  of  the  language 
has  proved  the  most  effective  method  :  but  the  evidence  is  greatly 
strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the  differences  found  in  the  language 
are  throughout  accompanied  by  differences  of  metre.  These  differences 
are  sometimes  broadly  marked,  sometimes  subtle  :  but  they  can  always 
be  clearly  recognized  when  expressed  by  numerical  calculations. 

The  first  systematic  attempt  to  delimit  the  popular  Rigveda 
was  made  many  years  ago  by  Professor  Hermann  Oldenberg  in  his 
Prolegomena  to  the  Rigveda  (Berlin,  1888).  Oldenberg  also  adopted 
the  method  of  statistical  calculations;  and  was  thus  led  to  observe 
that  even  those  parts  of  the  Rigveda  which  were  not  in  his  view  later 
additions,  differed  very  materially  in  their  metrical  structure.     It  is 


x  Preface 

the  principal  object  of  this  book  to  examine  these  differences,  and  to 
see  whether  they  can  assist  us  to  obtain  an  arrangement  of  the  whole 
of  the  Rigveda  upon  historical  principles. 

In  my  view  this  question  is  to  be  answered  in  the  affirmative. 
I  believe  that  the  formal  scheme  reached  in  this  book,  by  which  each 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda  proper  is  assigned  to  one  of  four  successive 
periods,  is  a  true  adumbration  of  the  historical  development  of  the 
whole  literature,  and  should  be  a  real  assistance  to  the  study  of  its 
meaning.  On  the  other  hand,  I  do  not  for  a  moment- suggest  that  the 
materials  permit  of  any  accuracy  in  details.  At  the  same  time,  I  think 
it  is  conclusively  shewn  (if  it  has  not  been  shewn  long  ago)  that  the 
hymns  of  the  '  popular  Rigveda '  are  in  a  true  sense  later  additions, 
and  further  that  these  too  are  spread  over  a  long  period  of  time. 

The  conclusions  I  have  reached  have  been  in  their  main  outlines 
published  by  me  in  the  following  articles : 

L  in  the  Rigveda  (Festgruss  an  Rudolf  von  Roth,  1893,  pp.  145-148). 

Literary  Epochs  in  the  Rigveda  (KZ.  xxxiv,  pp.  297-344). 

Historical  Vedic  Grammar  (JAOS.  xviii  2). 

Rigveda  vii  33  (KZ.  xxxvii,  pp.  207-219). 

The  second  Mandala  of  the  Rigveda  (KZ.  xxxvii,  pp.  429-486).  » 

Rigveda  vii  18  (KZ.  xxxviii,  pp.  491-496). 

Rigveda  and  Atharvaveda  (JAOS.  xxii,  pp.  309-320). 

These  articles  also  contain  my  replies  to  the  objections  and 
criticisms  which  my  propositions  have  called  forth  from  several  Vedic 
scholars. 

Although  my  position  has  not  yet  won  acceptance,  I  have  received 
encouragement  from  more  than  one  quarter  to  proceed  to  the  publication 
of  my  views  in  a  complete  form.  In  so  doing  I  have  endeavoured  to 
reduce  controversy  to  a  minimum,  and  to  give  instead  with  all  possible 
fulness  the  materials  from  which  I  have  drawn  my  own  conclusions, 
but  by  which  others  in  turn  may  be  led  to  form  more  or  less  divergent 
views.  I  have  not  dropped  the  thread  of  historical  theory  which  to 
my  mind  binds  together  in  proper  order  a  large  collection  of  facts  :  but 
even  if  this  thread  be  not  altogether  sound,  the  collections  themselves 
can  hardly  fail  to  be  of  service  to  future  students. 

In  elaborating  this  work  I  found  that  solutions  were  incidentally 
suggested  to  several  important  questions  which  affect  the  text  of  the 
Rigveda. 

The  first  group  of  these  questions  has  to  do  with  the  proposed 
1  resolutions '  by  which  H.  Grassmann  in  his  Worterbuch  zum  Rigveda 
(1873)  has  attempted  to  restore  completeness  to  numerous  verses  in 
the  Rigveda  in  the  number  of  syllables  :  and  more  particularly  with  the 


Preface  xi 

restoration  of  indara  for  indra,  and  of  -aam  for  -dm  in  the  genitive 
plural.  Although  the  native  commentators  justify  the  principle  of 
resolution,  there  have  always  been  scholars  who  have  questioned 
Grassmann's  procedure,  which  in  fact  assumes  a  fluidity  of  pronun- 
ciation not  known  in  any  settled  language.  I  trust  that  the  treatment 
of  these  points  in  Ch.  Ill  will  greatly  reduce  the  uncertainty  that  has 
hitherto  prevailed  on  these  points. 

The  second  group  of  questions  has  to  do  with  the  authority  of  the 
Sariihita  text  with  regard  to  vowel  quantities,  and  in  particular  with 
regard  to  the  so-called  ■  Sariihita  lengthenings,'  that  is  the  final  vowels 
which  are  found  with  short  quantity  in  the  Pada-patha  text  and  in  the 
native  grammars,  but  (more  or  less  regularly)  with  long  quantity  in 
the  Samhita  text. 

As  the  method  of  this  book  prohibits  me  from  discussing  the 
history  of  this  question  in  the  text,  I  take  this  opportunity  of  giving 
some  account  of  it  here.  This  seems  the  more  desirable,  as  I  hope 
this  illustration  will  justify  the  cardinal  principle  which  I  have 
followed,  namely  to  disregard  in  points  of  this  character  the  authority 
not  only  of  the  native  commentators,  but  also  of  the  Sariihita  as  well 
as  the  Pada-patha  text,  and  to  be  guided  solely  by  the  general  usage 
of  the  Vedic  poets. 

The  current  explanation  of  what  I  have  termed  the  '  variant  final 
vowels,'  i.e.  the  final  vowels  of  which  the  quantity  varies  in  the  Samhita 
text,  is  derived  from  the  unhistorical  views  of  the  native  commentators, 
and  is  somewhat  as  follows.  In  certain  positions  in  the  verse  metrical 
laws  require  long  quantity  :  but  the  poets  find  themselves  unable  to 
provide  words  of  the  requisite  measurement.  They  therefore  introduce 
syllables  of  which  the  quantity  is  short,  and  give  to  those  syllables  an 
artificial  long  value  by  'poetical  license,'  the  syllables  being  thereby 
'metrically  lengthened.'  This  general  theory  is  frequently  asserted 
upon  the  authority  of  the  two  scholars  who  have  dealt  most  fully 
with  the  question,  namely  Th.  Benfey  and  J.  Zubatv.  But  in  fact 
the  credit  should  rather  be  given  to  these  writers  of  having  shewn 
that  the  theory  is  untenable. 

Only  habit  can  explain  the  general  acceptance  of  so  remarkable 
a  metrical  theory  :  still  Latin  scholars  will  faintly  recollect  that  the 
verse  even  of  Virgil  was  thought  not  so  long  ago  to  require  the 
occasional  apology  of  '  metrical  license,'  and  has  not  Horace  said  that 
at  times  bonus  dormitat  Bomerusl  In  this  case  however  a  metrical 
license,  of  which  the  instances  can  be  counted  by  the  thousand,  seems 
to  destroy  the  nature  of  verse  altogether.  How  are  we  to  suppose 
that  the  poets  should  always  find  the  metre  embarrassing  just  as  they 


xii  Preface 

reached  a  final  vowel  %  and  why  should  they  be  embarrassed  at  all  by 
the  metre  if  they  possessed  in  themselves  the  power  to  transmute  at 
will  a  vowel  quantity  ?  In  truth  the  two  principles  of  '  resolution '  and 
1  metrical  lengthening '  together,  if  unduly  pressed,  reduce  metre  to  an 
absurdity,  since  by  means  of  them  any  piece  of  plain  prose  can  be 
shewn  to  correspond  to  some  metrical  scheme. 

Benfey  dealt  with  the  question  in  a  series  of  articles  on  the 
Quantitdtsverschiedenheiten,  which  extend  over  the  seven  years  1874— 
1880  and  were  never  completed.  His  studies  in  comparative  language 
at  once  suggested  to  him  an  historical  explanation,  namely  that  the 
vowels  in  question  were  originally  long,  but  in  the  course  of  time 
shortened.  This  explanation  is  at  first  quite  tentative,  but  as  his 
work  proceeds  is  used  with  increasing  confidence.  He  finds  repeatedly 
that  the  long  vowels  are  used  in  positions  in  which  short  vowels  would 
be  equally  or  more  acceptable  from  the  metrical  standpoint :  here  of 
course  the  idea  of  '  metrical  license '  is  out  of  the  question.  Still,  from 
habit,  Benfey  continues  to  use  the  explanation  *  metrical '  wherever  the 
long  quantity  suits  the  metre  well,  which  is  usually  the  case. 

Zubaty  took  up  the  matter  about  ten  years  later  (1888-1891)  from 
a  rather  different  standpoint.  Assuming  that  in  all  these  forms  the 
Vedic  poets  were  free  to  choose  either  the  long  or  the  short  syllable,' 
in  fact  that  the  quantity  was  '  doubtful,'  he  argues  from  the  quantity 
actually  found  in  the  Samhita  text  to  the  metrical  preferences  of  the 
poets.  In  this  way  he  has  no  difficulty  in  shewing  that  current  theories 
as  to  the  Vedic  metres  were  often  founded  on  a  very  slender  basis 
of  fact.  Notably  he  corrected  an  error  into  which  all  previous  writers 
had  fallen,  in  supposing  that  the  poets  preferred  short  quantity  in  the 
third  syllable  of  each  verse.  This  imagined  '  rule '  had  been  imported 
from  Greek  iambic  verse  into  the  supposed  iambic  verse  of  the  Rigveda 
without  any  enquiry  as  to  the  facts.  Zubaty 's  work  is  remarkable  for 
the  completeness  and  orderly  arrangement  of  his  material,  but  un- 
fortunately its  publication  was  never  completed. 

I  fear  that  my  treatment  of  this  subject  on  pages  108-140  will  be 
thought  complicated  and  difficult :  but  perhaps  this  will  be  more 
readily  excused  by  those  who  are  familiar  with  the  voluminous  writings 
and  inconclusive  results  of  my  two  predecessors.  For  many  years 
I  had  avoided  this  subject  as  too  difficult  for  treatment,  and  had 
intended  to  assume  (with  Zubaty)  the  correctness  of  the  Samhita  text 
as  a  working  hypothesis.  But  my  study  of  the  subject  of  '  resolution ' 
shewed  me  that  the  Vedic  poets  were  in  the  habit  of  following  very 
definite  standards  of  pronunciation,  with  only  a  small  margin  of  choice 
in  the  case  of  words  which  were  actually  changing  their  pronunciation 


Preface  xiii 

in  common  speech.  I  felt  therefore  that  I  could  not  accept  Zubaty's 
theory  of  optional  quantity,  and  that  a  systematic  study  of  Vedic  usage 
must  necessarily  reveal  in  every  case  either  a  fixed  or  at  any  rate  a 
preferential  quantity.  It  required  some  time  to  examine  and  classify 
the  many  thousands  of  occurrences  in  the  Rigveda,  and  it  is  not  easy 
to  put  forward  the  detailed  results  in  a  form  in  which  tliey  can  readily 
be  followed.  But  the  general  conclusion  is  only  strange  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  new.  All  the  difficulties  disappear  when  Benfey's  suggestion 
is  carried  out,  not  in  a  hesitating  or  tentative  fashion,  but  to  its  logical 
conclusion.  A  great  number  of  final  vowels  are  always  long  in  Vedic 
usage,  though  in  the  Samhita  text  they  are  often,  and  in  the  Pada- 
patha  text  always,  short :  that  is  to  say,  the  Samhita  text  has  partly, 
the  Pada-patha  text  entirely,  failed  to  preserve  the  original  quantity. 
The  metrical  position  is  not  the  cause  which  has  produced  long  quantity 
in  certain  cases,  but  the  hindrance  which  has  prevented  the  corruption 
of  the  Samhita  text  by  the  prevailing  usage.  In  other  endings  the 
shortening  can  be  traced  in  the  later  parts  of  the  Rigveda  itself.  The 
instances  in  which  any  real  doubt  remains  become  in  this  way  reduced 
to  a  very  small  number. 

I  am  aware  that  in  postulating  original  long  quantity  for  many 
of  these  vowels,  objections  may  also  be  raised  by  the  writers  on 
comparative  grammar.  But  these  objections  seem  in  no  way  entitled 
to  a  hearing.  In  treating  of  the  metre  of  Plautus  or  Virgil  we  deduce 
our  facts  directly  from  the  usage  of  these  writers,  and  the  theories  of 
comparative  grammar  must  follow.  There  are  numerous  instances  in 
which  the  forms  used  by  Plautus  are,  from  the  broad  standpoint  of 
comparative  grammar,  of  later  date  than  the  forms  used  by  Virgil : 
but  from  the  special  standpoint  of  Latin  literature  the  forms  peculiar 
to  Plautus  are  the  archaic  forms.  If  therefore  it  is  urged  that  the 
verb-forms  bhara  (2  sing,  imperative)  and  bharata  (2  plur.)  are  not, 
in  the  view  of  comparative  grammarians,  older  than  the  forms  bhara, 
bharata,  it  must  be  remembered,  first,  that  this  theory  is  to  some 
extent  founded  upon  the  incorrect  postulate  of  the  Sanskrit  gram- 
marians that  bhara,  bharata  are  the  true  Vedic  forms ;  and  secondly, 
that  even  if  the  short  vowel  is  really  more  primitive  (and  Benfey  at 
least  doubted  this),  the  long  vowel  may,  and  indeed  as  the  facts  shew, 
must  have  established  itself  in  the  interval  between  the  primitive  period 
referred  to  and  the  times  of  classical  Sanskrit. 

This  discussion  may  seem  to  lead  to  an  unsatisfactory  result  in 
so  far  as  it  increases  the  doubts  that  must  be  felt  as  to  the  general 
correctness  of  the  Samhita  text,  and  thereby  seems  to  shake  the  solid 
structure  unde  omnia  cognita  pendent.      But  the  errors  of  the  text  in 


xiv  Preface 

small  details  are  so  numerous  that  no  commentator  has  ever  left  them 
unnoticed.  The  question  rather  arises  whether  the  understanding  of 
the  Rigveda  would  not  make  better  progress  if  the  task  of  emendation 
were  more  vigorously  taken  in  hand.  Upon  this  question  I  have 
hardly  ventured  to  enter  in  the  body  of  the  book,  for  a  better  know- 
ledge of  the  metre  seems  to  me  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  textual 
correction  :  although  in  the  Metrical  Commentary  I  have  indicated 
a  fair  number  of  simple  alterations  in  the  text  which  (if  admissible  on 
other  grounds)  have  the  advantage  of  removing  metrical  difficulties. 
But  where  difficulties  of  interpretation  and  of  metre  concur  in  the  same 
verses,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  solution  is  to  be  found  in  that 
direction  :  and  therefore  I  have  suggested  (though  only  in  a  tentative 
way)  in  Ch.  IX  this  method  of  dealing  with  some  of  the  hymns  in  the 
1  uneven  lyric '  metres,  which  are  here  for  the  first  time  recognised  as 
entitled  to  rank  as  a  distinct  class  of  established  metrical  forms. 

To  the  writers  already  named  I  am  indebted,  not  only  in  regard 
to  the  matters  specifically  referred  to,  but  also  for  suggestions  and 
collections  of  material  which  extend  over  a  large  part  of  my  work. 
There  are  many  others  to  whom  I  am  under  obligations  in  some  one 
or  more  particulars  for  their  contributions  to  this  subject  either  in 
their  publications  or  in  private  communications.  Such  are  Rudolf 
Roth  (to  whose  memory  I  venture  to  dedicate  this  work  as  one  of  his 
old  pupils,  and  to  whose  principles  of  Vedic  interpretation  I  mostly 
adhere),  A.  Weber,  A.  Ludwig,  R.  Kuhnau,  R.  Pischel,  Karl 
Geldner,  A.  Meillet,  A.  A.  Macdonell,  E.  W.  Hopkins,  and  Emil 
Sieg.  I  fear  the  references  given  to  these  writers  in  the  text  very 
imperfectly  represent  these  obligations. 

It  remains  for  me  to  acknowledge  the  direct  assistance  I  have 
received  in  the  preparation  of  this  work.  Professors  H.  Oldenberg 
and  J.  Zubaty  have  assisted  me  throughout  by  numerous  criticisms  and 
suggestions,  and  the  latter  also  by  placing  at  my  disposal  the  un- 
published part  of  his  articles  on  the  Quantitdtswechsel.  Professors 
C.  Bendall  and  E.  J.  Rapson  have  kindly  read  my  proofs  throughout, 
as  Professor  Oldenberg  has  also  done  for  a  large  part  of  the  book  :  and 
each  of  these  has  in  turn  saved  me  from  many  errors  which  otherwise 
would  have  disfigured  the  work.  To  the  liberality  of  the  Cambridge 
University  Press,  assisted  by  a  substantial  grant  from  the  Cambridge 
Philological  Society,  I  owe  it  that  the  book  has  been  produced  with 
all  the  aids  of  modern  typography  without  any  cost  to  myself. 

E.  VERNON  ARNOLD. 

Bangor,  June,  1905. 


CHAPTER  I. 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION. 

1.  The  object  of  the  present  work  is  the  study  of  the  metre 
of  the  Rigveda  in  connexion  with  its  history,  and  of  the  history 
of  the  Rigveda  by  the  aid  of  the  metre.  In  this  study  the  funda- 
mental questions  which  concern  the  metre  of  the  Atharvaveda  and 
other  early  Indian  poetry  are  implicitly  contained. 

2.  The  historical  standpoint  is  strange  to  Indian  literary 
tradition.  Men  of  learning  who  regard  the  Rigveda  with  the 
respect  due  to  a  book  of  sacred  authority,  who  find  in  it  the 
inspired  source  of  the  convictions  and  laws  which  hold  together 
the  social  life  of  their  country,  must  naturally  look  for  unity  and 
agreement  in  its  parts.  Scrupulously  faithful  in  the  preservation 
of  every  iota  of  its  text,  they  seek  to  interpret  its  form  and  its 
meaning  by  absolute  standards.  To  their  diligence  and  sincerity 
we  of  the  West  are  deeply  indebted  :  for  in  this  way  a  unique 
monument  of  the  history  of  mankind  has  been  preserved,  and  no 
small  contribution  made  to  its  understanding. 

3.  But  to  students  of  the  European  tradition  the  Rigveda  is 
not  a  book,  but  a  library  and  a  literature.  Our  acquaintance  with 
the  poetry  of  many  other  countries  leads  us  quickly  to  the  con- 
viction that  its  ten  MaTidalas  or  cycles  have  gathered  up  the  work 
of  many  periods,  and  that  the  original  composition  of  the  hymns 
was  probably  the  work  of  several  centuries.  During  the  period  in 
which  this  poetry  was  produced,  great  political  and  social  changes 
undoubtedly  occurred :  but  of  these  there  exists  no  record,  except 
such  as  is  contained  in  the  pages  of  the  Rigveda  itself,  or  may  be 
distantly  inferred  from  our  knowledge  of  the  general  history  of 
mankind.  It  becomes  therefore  our  task  to  study  the  Rigveda 
from  within. 

a.  1 


2  'Internal'  evidence  of  metre 

4.  For  this  undertaking  the  material  at  our  disposal  is  on  the 
whole  abundant.  We  have  besides  at  our  service  native  theories 
of  metre,  worked  out  by  the  authors  of  the  Pratisakhyas  and  the 
AnuJcramams:  but  we  have  no  longer  need  of  them,  because  the 
study  of  the  text  of  the  Rigveda  enables  us  to  ascertain  for 
ourselves  the  principles  which  guided  the  Vedic  bards1 :  and  in 
regard  to  details,  the  native  authorities  appear  to  be  no  better 
informed  than  ourselves.  We  have  the  advantage  of  them  in  that 
we  start  free  from  the  prejudices  naturally  engendered  in  India 
by  the  linguistic  and  metrical  practice  of  the  commentators'  own 
times,  and  because  we  have  a  wider  knowledge  of  the  general 
history  of  language.  On  the  other  hand,  we  stand  in  danger  of 
importing  into  our  subject  other  prejudices,  derived  from  too 
hasty  comparisons  with  classical  or  modern  verse,  or  from  the 
instinctive  desire  to  find  short  and  simple  solutions  of  the 
problems  that  arise  in  a  great  field  of  literature  in  which  the 
workers  are  so  few  and  the  desire  of  completed  knowledge  is 
so  keen. 

5.  Almost  every  European  and  American  critic  of  the  Rigveda 
has  made  some  contribution  towards  the  theory  of  its  metre :  but 
probably  the  present  is  the  first  attempt  to  comprise  in  one  view 
the  whole  of  the  material  available.  As  such  it  is  necessarily 
tentative  in  character,  and  may  be  found  to  need  correction  in 
important  details.  In  the  present  chapter  it  is  proposed  to  state 
the  general  conclusions  which  have  been  accepted  or  independently 
reached  by  the  author,  and  the  nature  of  the  evidence  by  which 
the}'  are  supported.  In  subsequent  chapters  the  different  parts 
of  the  subject  will  be  considered  in  detail,  and  it  is  hoped  that  it 
will  appear  that  the  general  theory  presents  a  consistent  and 
reasonable  interpretation  of  the  facts  as  a  whole.  If  this  is  so, 
it  will  have  a  claim  to  be  accepted  by  historical  students  as  a 
sound  working  hypothesis  :  but  if  otherwise,  the  collections  of 
material  at  least  will  be  available  for  other  investigators. 

6.  Western  critics  of  Vedic  metre,  in  dealing  with  isolated 
questions,  fall  into  two  schools,  according  as  they  are  directly 
guided  by  textual  or  metrical  principles.  Some,  having  regard 
to  the  great  antiquity  and  authority  of  the  Samhita  text,  feel 

1  F.  Max  Miiller,  Hymns  to  the  Maruts  (London,  1869),  p.  lxxvi. 


The  'quantitative'  test  3 

alarmed  at  any  proposal  to  tamper  with  it :  and  incline  in  all  cases 
of  doubt  to  maintain  the  text,  and  to  admit  a  metrical  irregularity. 
Others,  again,  recognizing  the  general  skilfulness  of  the  Vedic 
bards,  propose  in  the  same  cases  textual  restoration.  If  the 
inclination  of  the  one  school  were  carried  to  an  extreme,  the 
1  theory  of  Vedic  metre '  would  be  merely  a  summary  of  the  facts 
presented  by  the  existing  text,  with  the  possible  exception  of  such 
modifications  as  native  authorities  regard  as  permissible :  if  on  the 
other  hand  a  free  field  is  left  for  the  ingenuity  of  the  second  school, 
strict  canons  of  metre  will  be  laid  down,  and  criticism  will  occupy 
itself  with  suggesting  alterations  of  the  text  wherever  it  does  not 
conform  to  them. 

7.  In  spite  of  the  logical  dilemma,  a  very  general  agreement 
has  been  reached  on  many  important  points :  and  this  fact  at  once 
shews  that  we  can  neither  regard  the  text  as  final,  nor  the  metrical 
standards  as  holding  good  without  exception.  If  we  can  discover 
the  logical  ground  on  which  the  one  or  the  other  is  to  be  preferred, 
further  progress  will  be  assured. 

8.  Now  it  is  admitted  that  the  text  must  be  corrected  in 
some  points,  as  for  instance  in  giving  syllabic  value  to  y  and  v, 
because  without  such  correction  the  Rigveda  is  merely  prose :  and 
it  is  not  conceivable  that  the  arbitrary  correction  of  two  letters 
only  of  the  alphabet  could  convert  prose  into  verse  on  so  large  a 
scale.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  admitted  that  we  have  deviation 
from  the  usual  metrical  rules  in  such  a  hymn  as  ii  11,  because  it 
is  inconceivable  that  textual  incorrectness  could  cause  so  large 
a  proportion  of  verses  in  one  hymn  to  be  defective  in  precisely  the 
same  way. 

9.  The  principle  underlying  these  admissions  on  either  side 
is  clearly  quantitative:  the  multiplicity  of  instances  constitutes 
the  proof.  Native  as  well  as  European  commentators  alike  adopt 
without  hesitation  that  hypothesis  which  accounts  for  the  largest 
number  of  facts  in  the  simplest  way.  If  one  textual  correction 
will  rectify  ten  verses,  we  make  the  textual  correction :  if  the 
admission  of  one  metrical  variation  or  irregularity  will  accord 
with  the  text  of  ten  verses,  we  admit  the  metrical  variation. 
The  full  application  of  this  principle  can  only  be  learnt  by 
experience :  but  its  short  statement  will  sufficiently  indicate  the 
importance  of  a  full  collection  of  facts  as  a  basis  for  any  theory. 

1-2 


4  Historical  division  of  the  Rigveda 

10.  Western  critics  are  far  from  unanimous  in  their  views  as 
to  the  historical  relation  of  the  different  parts  of  the  Rigveda. 
Still  there  is  a  very  general  agreement  upon  two  points  :  (i)  that 
the  division  of  the  Rigveda  into  mandalas  is,  in  part  at  least, 
based  upon  historical  grounds,  the  different  mandalas  (or  their 
parts)  being  relatively  homogeneous ;  and  (ii)  that  certain  hymns 
appearing  at  the  end  of  each  of  the  first  nine  mandalas,  or  of 
sections  of  these,  and  others  constituting  a  large  part  of  the  tenth 
mandala,  are  homogeneous  in  character  with  the  Atharvaveda, 
and  constitute  later  additions  to  the  original  Rigveda  collection, 
or  "  Rigveda  proper." 

11.  It  may  be  said  without  hesitation  that  the  two  propo- 
sitions just  stated  constitute  the  only  possible  basis  for  the 
historical  study  of  the  Rigveda.  In  consequence  of  their  great 
importance  they  will  be  fully  examined  in  the  earlier  chapters  of 
this  book  :  for  the  moment  it  will  be  sufficient  to  notice  that  they 
depend  on  arguments  partly  of  language,  partly  of  metre,  each 
being  held  to  confirm  the  other.  As  before,  the  arguments  are 
quantitative  in  character.  If  in  a  particular  collection  forming  part 
of  the  Rigveda  certain  features  of  language  or  metre  recur  with 
much  greater  frequency  than  in  other  parts,  it  is  held  that  that 
collection  is  historically  homogeneous,  being  the  work  either  of 
one  poet  or  of  poets  connected  in  time  and  in  family.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  in  that  collection  we  find  one  or  more  hymns  in 
which  these  common  features  are  absent,  it  is  held  that  these  are 
misplaced  in  the  text,  and  should  be  assigned  to  some  other 
author  or  period  in  accordance  with  their  inner  content. 

12.  The  subject  falls  into  the  following  divisions : — 
(i)     the  text  of  the  Rigveda  ; 

(ii)     the  metres ; 

(iii)     the   rearrangement   of   the  Rigveda   in    homogeneous 
parts ;  and 

(iv)     the  historical  development  of  the  art  of  versification. 

No  one  of  these  divisions  can  be  adequately  treated  apart 
from  the  others.  In  following  the  order  laid  down,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  refer  from  time  to  time  either  to  later  sections  of  this 
chapter,  or  to  the  more  detailed  discussion  with  which  subsequent 
chapters  are  occupied,  in  order  to  obtain  a  full  survey  of  the  facts. 


Textual  restoration 


(i)    The  Text  of  the  Bjgveda. 

13.  Our  single  first-hand  authority  for  the  text  of  the 
Rigveda  is  the  "  Sarhhita "  recension,  which  has  been  preserved 
from  an  unknown  antiquity  without  any  variants  of  importance. 
The  "  Pada-patha "  text  is  now  acknowledged  to  be  an  early 
commentary  upon  the  Sarhhita,  and  cannot  be  set  in  opposition 
to  its  authority.  Other  Vedic  texts  repeat  the  matter  of  many 
hymns  of  the  Rigveda  in  slightly  differing  forms,  but  in  such 
cases  the  Sarhhita  text  generally  appears  to  have  the  advantage, 
and  it  may  be  inferred  with  some  confidence  that  the  other  texts 
were  historically  derived  from  it. 

The  Sarhhita  text  can  therefore  only  be  revised  upon  internal 
evidence,  that  of  the  metre  being  the  most  important. 

14.  The  following  restorations  are  amongst  those  generally 
agreed  upon  : — 

(i)  where  the  text,  in  accordance  with  the  classical  rules  of 
Sandhi,  combines  the  final  vowel  of  one  word  with  the  initial 
vowel  of  the  next,  final  a  a  must  occasionally,  and  final  i  %  u  u 
generally,  be  read  as  separate  syllables. 

(ii)  where  the  text  omits  initial  a  after  final  -ah  or  -e,  the 
initial  a  must  usually  be  restored  as  a  separate  syllable. 

(iii)  in  numerous  words  and  endings  the  value  of  a  separate 
syllable  is,  either  necessarily  or  optionally,  to  be  given  to  y  v  of 
the  text  :  e.g.  \ndriyah  is  to  be  read  for  ndryah,  ^tuvdm  for  tvdm1. 

(iv)  in  a  few  words  long  vowels  or  diphthongs  are  optionally 
to  be  read  as  equivalent  to  two  syllables :  thus  sresthah  as 
fsrdyisthah,  gopd  as  gopda. 

(v)  a  few  words  are  regularly  misrepresented :  thus  for 
pdvakd  we  must  always  read  pavakd,  for  suvandh  almost  always 
svandh,  for  mrlaya  always  mflaya. 

15.  In  other  cases  restoration  is  less  certain,  because  the 
metre  itself  is  open  to  doubt.  The  following  are  the  most 
important  : — 

1  The  technical  spellings  ndriah,  tudm  indicate  the  occasions  on  which  such 
restorations  are  required.  Though  not  in  accordance  with  Indian  practice,  they 
have  the  advantage  that  they  cannot  be  mistaken  for  Samhita  readings. 


6  Undetermined  problems 

(i)  in  numerous  verses  some  part  of  the  noun  indra  follows 
the  caesura,  and  the  number  of  syllables  in  the  verse  appears  to 
be  ten,  whereas  most  verses  in  the  same  hymn  have  eleven 
syllables.  If  we  interpret  indra  metrically  as  a  word  of  three 
syllables,  e.g.  indara,  the  verses  in  which  the  word  occurs  contain 
the  normal  number  of  syllables.  But  on  the  other  hand  indra  is 
commonly  a  disyllable,  and  verses  of  ten  syllables  are  sufficiently 
common  in  the  Rigveda  to  suggest  a  metrical  solution  of  the 
difficulty. 

(ii)  in  numerous  verses  ending  with  some  genitive  plural 
form  in  -dm  there  appear  to  be  only  seven  syllables,  but  if  we 
read  instead  -aam  the  regular  number  of  eight  is  obtained.  But 
verses  of  seven  syllables  are  in  many  such  hymns  fairly  common, 
and  these  verses  may  be,  and  are  by  some  critics,  so  interpreted. 

(iii)  the  final  vowel  of  many  flexional  endings  and  of  several 
adverbs  is  given  by  the  text  sometimes  as  short,  sometimes  as 
long.  The  distinction  to  a  large  extent  follows  the  preferences  of 
the  metrical  rhythm  :  and  it  is  not  easy  to  determine  whether  the 
quantity  given  represents  the  true  value  of  the  ending,  or  an 
artificial  pronunciation  by  which  a  slight  irregularity  of  metre  is 
glozed  over.  In  these  cases  the  Pada-patha  usually  gives  the 
short  value,  but  this  is  only  evidence  of  the  pronunciation  of  the 
word  at  the  time  when  this  commentary  was  composed. 

16.  In  the  determination  of  the  text  of  the  Rigveda  that  of  the 
metrical  value  of  words  and  syllables  is  implicitly  contained.  The 
metrical  value  of  a  word  depends  solely  upon  the  number  and 
succession  of  the  short  and  long  syllables  which  it  contains,  without 
regard  to  the  position  of  the  accent.  A  syllable  containing  a  long 
vowel  or  diphthong  is  necessarily  long,  the  only  doubt  arising  when 
the  long  vowel  or  diphthong  is  final,  and  the  next  word  in  the  same 
verse  begins  with  a  vowel.  In  such  cases  the  quantity  of  a  final 
diphthong  is  that  of  its  prior  element,  as  is  shewn  by  a  correct  text 
in  ddma  d  (for  ddme  d),  tdsmd  adat  (for  tdsmai  adat):  but  the 
quantity  of  a  long  final  vowel  when  not  combined  by  Sandhi  is 
not  always  easy  to  determine. 

A  syllable  the  vowel  of  which  is  followed  by  two  consonants  is 
long.  One  or  both  of  these  consonants  may  belong  to  a  word 
following,  provided  that  it  belongs  to  the  same  verse.  The  sounds 
represented  by  m  h  are  for  this  purpose  recognized  as  full  con- 


The  principal  metres  7 

sonants :  and  the  Vedic  Ih  (also  variously  represented  by  Ih  or  dh) 
is  equivalent  to  a  double  consonant. 

17.  The  following  stanza  will  illustrate  the  general  character 
of  metrical  restoration  in  the  Rigveda : — 

(i)     Samhita  text  (following  Aufrecht's  edition): — 
vaydm  adyendrasya  prestha  vaydm  4v6  vocemahi  samarye  \  vaydm 
purd  mdhi  ca  no  dnu  dyun  tan  na  rbhuksd  nardm  dnu  syat  || 

(ii)     Text  metrically  restored  : 

vaydm  adyd  indarasya  prdyistJidh 
vaydm  4u6  vocemahi  samarye  | 
vaydm  purti  mdhi  ca  na  dnu  dyun 
tdn  na  rbhuksd  nardam  dnu  syat  || 

,  i  167  io. 

(ii)    The  Metres. 

18.  The  units  of  Vedic  metre  are  the  '  verse,'  the  '  stanza,'  and 
the  '  hymn.' 

19.  A  verse  consists  most  commonly  either  of  eight  syllables, 
when  we  distinguish  it  as  a  dimeter  verse :  or  of  eleven  or  twelve 
syllables,  both  of  which  varieties  are  included  under  the  name 
trimeter  verse. 

20.  The  number  of  syllables  in  a  verse  is  not  quite  rigidly 
prescribed.  Thus  many  dimeter  verses  contain  seven  syllables 
only :  such  verses,  if  they  correspond  in  rhythm  to  an  ordinary 
dimeter  verse  with  loss  of  the  last  syllable,  we  term  catalectic 
dimeter  verses :  if  otherwise,  the  more  general  name  heptasyllabic 
may  be  used. 

21.  Similarly,  trimeter  verses  which  contain  only  ten  syllables 
are  not  uncommon,  such  verses  being  usually  equivalent  to  the 
verse  of  eleven  syllables  with  the  loss  of  a  syllable  before  or  after 
the  caesura.     These  shorter  verses  may  be  termed  decasyllabic. 

22.  The  most  typical  forms  of  the  stanza  are 

(i)     the  Anustubh,  which  consists  of  four  dimeter  verses,  and 
(ii)    the  Tristubh,  which  consists  of  four  trimeter  verses,  each 

of  eleven  syllables. 

Four  trimeter  verses,  each  of  twelve  syllables,  form  a  Jagatl 

stanza. 


8  '  External '  metrical  form 

23.  Stanzas  may  contain  more  or  fewer  verses  than  four. 
Thus  the  Odyatrl  consists  of  three  dimeter  verses,  the  Pankti  of 
five,  the  Mahdpankti  of  six  :  whilst  three  Tristubh  verses  form  the 
metre  known  as  Virdj,  and  two  decasyllabic  verses  that  known  as 
Dvipadd  Virdj. 

24.  Stanzas  may  also  consist  of  combinations  of  dimeter  and 
trimeter  verses,  the  latter  being  then  usually  of  twelve  syllables : 
all  metres  of  this  type  we  group  as  lyric  metres.  Lyric  metres 
may  also  include  verses  of  four  syllables,  and  even  of  sixteen,  but 
these  are  comparatively  rare.  The  most  important  lyric  metres 
are  Usnih  (8.  8.  12  or  8.  8.  8.  4),  Kakubh  (8.  12.  8),  Brhatl 
(8.  8.  12.  8),  Satobrhati  (12.  8.  12.  8),  and  Atyasti  (12.  12.  8,  8.  8, 
12.  8). 

25.  The  strophe  (pragdtha)  is  comparatively  rare  in  the 
Rigveda,  and  consists  of  the  combination  of  a  Kakubh  or  Brhati 
stanza  with  a  Satobrhati  stanza. 

.    26.     A  few  hymns  are  composed  of  lyric  stanzas  of  very  various 
structures :  these  we  call  hymns  in  mixed  lyric  metres. 

27.  The  rare  combination  of  verses  of  eight  and  eleven 
syllables  in  one  stanza  gives  uneven  lyric  metre. 

28.  A  hymn  may  contain  any  number  of  stanzas,  but  usually 
it  consists  of  not  less  than  three  or  more  than  fifteen  stanzas, 
generally  uniform  in  character,  except  in  the  case  of  strophic  and 
1  mixed  lyric '  hymns.  It  is  also  not  uncommon  for  the  last  stanza 
of  a  hymn  to  contain  one  or  even  two  additional  verses. 

29.  Where  the  number  of  stanzas  in  a  hymn  is  very  large, 
or  the  metre  suddenly  changes,  it  becomes  probable  that  we  have 
a  composite  hymn,  that  is,  two  or  more  hymns  combined  in  the 
Samhita  text. 

The  number  of  such  composite  hymns  in  the  Rigveda  is  very 
large  :  but  the  hymns  thus  combined  are  usually  homogeneous  in 
character,  and,  if  so,  it  is  not  necessary  for  the  present  purpose  to 
separate  them.  If,  however,  the  suspicion  arises  that  one  of  the 
hymns  thus  combined  differs  in  date  or  character  from  another  to 
which  it  is  joined,  it  becomes  at  once  expedient  to  treat  them  as 
separate  hymns. 

30.  The  definitions  just  given  may  be  said  to  determine  the 
external  form  of  the  different  metres,  and   describe  their  more 


'  Internal '  metrical  form  9 

obvious  characteristics.  In  accordance  with  them  the  metres  may 
be  grouped  as  belonging  respectively  to  (a)  the  lyric,  (6)  the 
Anustubh,  (c)  the  Tristubh-Jagati/a?m7ies  respectively.  The  lyric 
metres  being  practically  unknown  in  later  literature,  may  be 
presumed  to  belong  to  the  more  distinctively  early  parts  of  the 
Rigveda. 

31.  We  proceed  to  consider  the  internal  form,  or  rhythm,  of 
the  different  kinds  of  verse.  The  internal  form  is  even  less  rigidly 
denned  than  the  external,  and  is  treated  by  native  commentators 
as  of  comparatively  small  importance.  There  are  few  parts  of  the 
verse  in  which  the  poets  do  not  consider  themselves  free  at  times 
to  depart  from  the  usual  rhythms,  so  that  it  may  perhaps  be  said 
that  there  are  no  'rules'  of  rhythm  in  the  Rigveda.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  no  considerable  part  of  the  verse  in  which  certain 
rhythms  are  not  steadily  favoured,  and  others  avoided  :  everywhere 
there  exist  metrical  preferences.  In  consequence  of  the  greater 
elasticity  of  the  internal  form,  its  study  is  more  difficult,  but  at 
the  same  time  yields  results  of  greater  historical  importance  than 
the  study  of  external  form. 

32.  In  all  metres  in  the  Rigveda  the  quantities  of  the  first 
and  last  syllables  of  each  verse  are  indifferent,  and  (with  some 
exceptions)  each  verse  is  independent  in  structure. 

33.  In  almost  all  metres  a  general  iambic  rhythm  may  be 
noticed,  in  the  sense  that  the  even  syllables,  namely  the  second, 
fourth,  and  so  on,  are  more  often  long  than  short.  Hence  it  has 
been  supposed  that  Vedic  metre  has  arisen  historically  from  some 
combination  of  iambic  '  feet,'  such  as  is  found  in  so  many  Greek 
metres.  This  supposition  meets  with  many  difficulties,  and  the 
use  of  the  terms  '  dimeter'  and  '  trimeter'  verse  in  this  book  is  not 
intended  to  imply  acceptance  of  any  such  historical  theory. 

34.  In  all  metres  the  rhythm  of  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  is 
much  more  rigidly  defined  than  that  of  the  earlier  part.  Hence  it 
has  often,  but  incorrectly,  been  supposed  that  the  earlier  part  of 
the  verse  is  non-rhythmical. 

35.  In  the  early  part  of  the  verse  there  is  a  general  preference 
for  long  syllables,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  for  short  syllables. 
These  preferences  modify  considerably  the  general  iambic  rhythm 
prevailing  in  both  parts. 


10  Dimeter  verse 

36.  The  dimeter  verse  falls  naturally  into  two  parts,  or  mem- 
bers, each  consisting  of  four  syllables.  There  is  no  caesura.  We 
distinguish  the  two  parts  as  the  opening  and  the  cadence. 

37.  In  the  opening  the  first  syllable  is  indifferent,  according 
to  §  32.  The  second  and  fourth  syllables  are  preferably  long  (§  33), 
but  often  short  (§  34).  As  to  the  third  syllable,  the  principles  laid 
down  in  §§  33,  35  appear  each  to  neutralise  the  other,  so  that  the 
quantity  of  this  syllable  is  indifferent.  But  if  the  second  syllable 
is  short,  the  third  is  almost  invariably  long.  This  fact  seems  to 
imply  some  principle  of  transfer  of  metrical  weight,  which  may  be 
described  by  the  term  syncopation,  used  in  a  somewhat  similar  way 
in  modern  music. 

38.  In  the  cadence  the  fifth  and  seventh  syllables  are  almost 
always  short  (§§  33 — 35),  but  it  is  not  unusual  to  find  a  short 
syllable  in  the  sixth  place  also  (§  35). 

39.  The  following  stanza,  in  which  the  division  into  parts  or 
members  is  marked  by  upright  lines,  is  therefore  fairly  typical  of 
Vedic  dimeter  verse : — 

tudm  vald\sya  gomatah  \ 
dpdvar  ad\rivo  bilam  j 
tudm  devd  |  dbibhyusas  | 
tujydmdnd\sa  dvisuh  || 

i  11   5- 

40.  In  Gayatrl  stanzas  preference  is  sometimes  shewn  for  a 
trochaic  rhythm  in  the  cadence.  Hymns  in  which  such  preference 
is  fairly  consistent  are  said  to  be  in  the  Trochaic  Gayatrl  metre. 
In  the  following  stanza  all  the  verses  have  a  strict  trochaic 
cadence : — 

ukthdm  cand  |  sasydmdnam  \ 

dgor  arir  |  d  ciketa  \ 

nd  gdyatrdm  |  giydmdnam  || 

viii  2   14. 

41.  An  important  variation  of  the  Anustubh  stanza  is  found 
in  those  parts  of  the  Rigveda  which  have  been  already  referred  to 
(§  10)  as  similar  in  character  to  the  Atharvaveda,  and  is  regular  in 
the  Atharvaveda  itself. 

In  this  variation  the  verses  are  grouped  in  pairs,  so  that  the 
stanza  consists  of  two  distichs,  and  each  distich  of  two  dimeter 


'Epic'  Anustubh  11 

verses.  In  each  distich  the  cadence  of  the  first  verse  and  the 
opening  of  the  second  are  modified  in  the  direction  of  lengthening 
the  third  syllable. 

In  order  to  make  clear  the  nature  of  this  change,  we  give  to 
the  last  part  of  the  first  and  third  verses  of  the  stanza  the  special 
title  semi- cadence,  and  to  the  opening  of  the  second  and  fourth 
verses  the  title  re-opening.  The  variation  may  then  be  defined  as 
follows : — 

The  seventh  syllable,  which  in  the  cadence  is  regularly  short, 
becomes  in  '  semi-cadence '  frequently  long. 

The  third  syllable,  of  which  the  quantity  in  the  opening  is 
indifferent,  becomes  almost  invariably  long  in  the  ■  re-opening.' 

To  this  metre  the  name  of  ■  later  Anustubh '  has  been  given, 
on  the  ground  that  it  is  only  found  in  the  later  additions  to  the 
Rigveda.  Without  questioning  the  truth  of  this  view,  it  may  be 
better  to  choose  a  more  colourless  epithet,  and  the  name  epic 
Anustubh  is  justified  by  the  resemblance  between  this  metre  and 
that  of  the  epic  sloka. 

The  following  stanza  shews  a  fully  developed  *  epic '  rhythm  : 
but  the  Rigveda  shews  every  gradation  from  the  normal  Anustubh 
rhythm  to  this. 

vdyur  asmd  |  tipdmanthat  \ 
pindsti  smd  \  kunannamd  \ 
kesi  visd\sya  pdtrena  \ 
ydd  rudrend\pibal  sahd  \\ 

x   136  7. 

42.  Trimeter  verse  may  be  analyzed  in  two  ways : — 

(i)  into  two  parts,  as  separated  by  the  caesura,  which  regu- 
larly follows  either  the  fourth  or  the  fifth  syllable :  or 

(ii)  into  three  members,  namely  (a)  the  opening,  which  consists 
of  the  first  four  syllables ;  (b)  the  break,  consisting  of  the  fifth, 
sixth,  and  seventh  syllables ;  and  (c)  the  cadence,  which  includes 
the  remaining  syllables,  beginning  with  the  eighth. 

43.  In  the  case  of  Tristubh  verse,  the  two  parts  consist  either 
of  four  and  seven  syllables,  or  of  five  and  six  syllables  each, 
according  as  the  caesura  is  early  (that  is,  after  the  fourth  syllable), 
or  late  (that  is,  after  the  fifth  syllable).  If  the  caesura  is  early, 
we  have  a  short  first  part  and  a  long  second  part :  if  late,  we  have 
a  long  first  part  and  a  short  second  part. 


12  ( Iambic'  and  'cretic1  rhythm 

In  the  case  of  Jagati  verse,  the  second  part  is  in  each  case 
longer  by  one  syllable. 

In  all  cases  the  second  part  regularly  begins  with  two  short 
syllables. 

44.  The  '  opening '  of  trimeter  verse,  if  the  caesura  is  early,  is 
identical  in  rhythm  with  that  of  dimeter  verse.  But  if  the  caesura 
is  late,  the  iambic  rhythm  is  much  more  strictly  observed,  and  we 
have  a  farther  example  of  syncopation  in  the  principle  that  if  the 
fourth  syllable  is  short,  the  fifth  must  be  long. 

45.  The  middle  member  of  trimeter  verse  is  termed  the 
'  break '  because  the  general  iambic  rhythm  is  broken  at  this 
point  by  the  preference  for  two  short  syllables  after  the  caesura. 
The  remaining  syllable  is  usually  long :  so  that  the  most  regular 
forms  are  1(  y  v  -  and  -  n  ^  ^,  where  the  symbol  M  marks  the 
position  of  the  caesura. 

46.  Sometimes  the  general  iambic  rhythm  is  not  broken  in 
the  middle  part  of  the  verse,  which  therefore  takes  one  of  the 
forms  ||  w  —  w  or  v  (l  -  v.  Hymns  in  which  such  rhythms  are 
prevalent,  as  is  the  case  in  particular  in  the  seventh  Mandala,  may 
be  said  to  be  in  Iambic  Tristubh  (or  Jagati)  metre. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  still  stronger  contrast  to  the  iambic 
rhythm  is  not  uncommon  after  an  early  caesura,  when  the  break 
takes  the  form  of  a  cretic  (, ,  -  ^  -).  Hymns  in  which  this  rhythm 
is  favoured  may  be  said  to  be  in  Cretic  Tristubh  (or  Jagati)  metre. 

The  iambic  and  cretic  variations  are  occasionally  found  in  all 
parts  of  the  Rigveda,  but  they  are  only  to  a  small  extent  com- 
bined in  the  same  hymns.  Hymns  in  the  lyric  metres  incline 
to  the  employment  of  iambic  variations,  which  therefore  appear 
to  be  characteristic  of  the  more  distinctively  early  parts  of  the 
Rigveda. 

47.  The  '  cadence '  of  trimeter  verse  shews  the  same  general 
rhythm  as  that  of  dimeter  verse.  Thus  the  ninth  syllable,  and 
in  Jagati  verse  the  eleventh,  are  regularly  short :  the  eighth  and 
the  tenth  are  regularly  long,  but  either  or  both  are  occasionally 
short. 

We  are,  however,  able  to  trace  a  progressive  tendency  to 
eliminate  the  employment  of  short  syllables  in  the  eighth  and 
tenth  places.     Thus  it  is  only  in  a  small  part  of  the  Rigveda  that 


Typical  trimeter  stanzas  13 

a  short  tenth  syllable  is  at  all  common :  whilst  the  short  eighth 
syllable  is  chiefly  found  in  the  shape  of  a  syllable  containing 
a  short  final  vowel.  The  employment  of  these  final  syllables  in 
a  position  from  which  other  short  syllables  are  excluded  requires 
careful  investigation,  and  has  evidently  some  connexion  with  the 
varying  quantities  which,  as  has  been  already  noticed  (§15  iii.), 
the  Samhita  text  assigns  in  many  cases  to  final  vowels. 

48.  The  following  stanzas  illustrate  the  most  important  forms 
of  Trimeter  verse,  the  division  of  the  'members'  being  again  shewn 
by  perpendicular  lines : — 

Normal  Tristubh  stanza : — 

bfhaspdtih  \\  \  prathamdm  \  jdyamdnah  \ 
maho  jyoti\sah  \\  para\me  vioman  \ 
saptdsias  \\  |  tuvija\to  rdvena  \ 
vi  saptdras\mir  u  adha\mat  tdmamsi  \\ 


iv  50  4. 


Normal  JagatI  stanza : — 

ddadd  dr\bham  fl  maha\te  vacasydve  \ 
kaksivate  n  |  vrcay&amp;m  \  indra  sunvate  | 
mendbhavo  \\  |  vrsa?ias\vdsya  sukrato  | 
visvet  td  te  \\  \  sdvane\su  pravdcia  \\ 

Tristubh  stanza  with  iambic  variations  : — 

agnim  vo  de\vdm  ^  agni\bhih  sajosah  \ 
ydjistham  du\tdm  n  adhva\re  krnudhvam  | 
yo  mdrtie\su  u  nidhru\vir  rtdva  | 
tapurmurdhd  \\  |  ghrtd-an\nah  pavdkdh  \\ 

Jagati  stanza  with  cretic  variations : — 

imam  stomam  u  |  drhate  \  jdtdvedase 
rdtham  iva  n  j  sdm  mahe\md  manlsdyd  \ 
bhadrd  hi  nah  \\  \  prdmatir  |  asya  samsddi 
dgne  sakhye  \\  \  md  risd\md  vaydm  tdva  \\ 


i  51 


vii  3 


94 


49.  'Decasyllabic'  verses  correspond  generally  to  Tristubh 
verses  with  the  omission  of  a  syllable  immediately  before  or  after 
the  caesura :  this  omission  we  term  a  rest  Two  types  are  used 
with   sufficient   regularity  to    have  given    special  names  to   the 


14  'Decasyllabic'  metres 

metres  of  the  hymns  .which  contain  them :  but  these,  as  well  as 
others,  are  frequently  found  in  combination  with  Tristubh  verse. 

50.  The  Viratsthdna  verse  has  a  rest  at  the  fifth  place,  fol- 
lowed by  a  trochee,  as : — 

rdsi  ksdyam  \\  |  •  rdsi  \  mitrdm  asme  \ 
rdsi  sdrdha  \\\  •  indra  j  mdrutam  nah  \ 
sajosaso  n  I  •  ye  ca  \  mandasdndh  \ 
prd  vdydvah  \\  |  •  pdnti  \  dgraiiitim  || 

ii  11    14. 

51.  The  Dvipada  Viraj  verse  has  a  rest  at  the  sixth  place, 
the  quantity  of  the  seventh  syllable  being  indifferent:  the  two 
parts  are  then  so  similar  in  form  that  the  stanza  of  two  deca- 
syllabic verses  may  also  be  described  as  containing  four  verses  of 
five  syllables,  or  pentads. 

Example : — 

rayir  nd  cit\rd  \\  •  s4\ro  nd  samdfk  \ 
dyur  nd  prd\n6  \\  •  ni\tyo  nd  sunuh  \\ 

i  66   1. 

Here  the  division  into  members  is  only  of  historic  interest, 
shewing  the  relation  of  this  metre  to  the  Tristubh. 

52.  In  two  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  a  similar  metre  is  based 
upon  the  JagatI  verse,  the  '  rest '  occupying  the  position  of  the 
syllable  first  following  the  caesura,  whether  early  or  late.  To  this 
metre,  following  the  traditional  name  of  the  author  of  the  hymns, 
we  may  give  the  name  Bhargava.  If  the  rest  be  denoted  by  a 
point  •  ,  the  most  common  forms  of  the  break  in  Bhargava  verse 
are  ,  |  •  ^  -  |  and  v  ,  (  •  - 1 . 

The  following  stauza  is  entirely  composed  of  Bhargava  verses, 
the  two  types  alternating : — 

sriye  mdryd\sa  \\  -  an\jih\r  akrnvata  | 
sumdrutam  n  |  .  nd  pur\vir  dti  ksdpah  \ 
divds  putrd\sa  n  •  e\td  nd  yetire  j 
dditydsas  \\\  -  td  ak\rd  nd  vdvrdhuh  \\ 

x  77  7. 

53.  It  seems  evident  that  the  decasyllabic  metres  (amongst 
which  we  include  the  Bhargava)  presuppose  and  are  derived 
from  the  more  common  trimeter  metres.     Their  precise  relation 


1  Contamination '  1 5 

to  them  is  an  important  subject  of  investigation.  As  none  of 
these  metres  are  found  in  the  Atharvaveda  or  later  literature, 
there  is  a  presumption  that,  like  the  lyric  metres,  they  belong  to 
the  distinctively  early  parts  of  the  Rigveda. 

54.  An  important  feature  in  trimeter  verse  is  contamination, 
or  the  combination  in  one  verse,  stanza,  or  hymn  of  parts  that  do 
not  correspond.     Contamination  may  be  external  or  internal. 

55.  External  contamination  is  the  combination  of  Tristubh 
and  Jagati  verses  in  the  same  stanza,  and  of  Tristubh  and  Jagati 
stanzas  in  the  same  hymn.  In  hymns  of  which  the  general 
character  is  Jagati  it  is  quite  usual  for  one  or  two  Tristubh  stanzas 
or  verses  to  appear  towards  the  end  of  the  hymn;  consequently  it 
is  rather  the  absence  of  such  variations  that  calls  for  notice,  at 
least  in  hymns  of  any  length.  But  the  contamination  of  a 
Tristubh  hymn  by  Jagati  is  only  exceptional  in  the  Rigveda, 
though  very  common  in  the  Atharvaveda  and  later  verse,  down 
to  and  including  the  epic  period.  It  forms  therefore  a  connecting 
link  between  the  Rigveda  and  this  later  literature. 

56.  Internal  contamination  is  the  combination  of  two  parts  of 
a  Tristubh  verse  which  correspond  to  different  positions  of  the 
caesura.  The  combination  of  two  parts  consisting  of  four  and 
six  syllables  respectively  gives  the  equivalent  of  a  decasyllabic 
verse  with  a  rest  at  the  caesura ;  verses  of  this  type,  whatever 
their  origin  may  be,  are  fairly  common  in  all  parts  of  the  Rigveda, 
as  for  example 

ino  rajann  \   ■  \\  ara\tih  sdmiddhah  J  x  3   1  a. 

The  combination  of  two  parts  consisting  of  five  and  seven  syllables 
respectively  may  be  termed  the  hybrid  verse.  It  is  often  found  in 
the  same  hymn  with  external  contamination :  the  two  features  are 
exemplified  in  the  first  and  third  verses  respectively  of  the  follow- 
ing stanza : — 

uruvydcd  |  no  \\  mahisdh  \  sdrma  yamsat  \ 

asmin  have  \\  j  puruhu\tdh  puruksuh  | 

sd  nah  prajd\yai  (|  hari\asva  mflaya  \ 

indra  md  no    u  \ririso  |  md  par  a  dah  || 

x   128  8. 

The  '  hybrid '  verse  is  again  a  connecting  link  with  the 
Atharvaveda  and  later  literature. 


16  Chronological  order  of  the  hymns 

(iii)    The  Rearrangement  of  the  Rigveda. 

57.  In  the  Samhita  text  the  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  are 
arranged  in  three  principal  groups,  of  which  the  largest  extends 
from  i  51  to  the  end  of  vii,  and  consists  of  fourteen  collections  of 
hymns  arranged  in  the  ascending  order  of  the  number  of  hymns 
contained  in  each :  the  hymns  to  Agni  coming  first,  then  those  to 
Indra,  in  each  collection.  These  are  usually  termed  the  family 
collections,  each  being  ascribed  by  tradition  to  a  particular  family 
of  bards. 

From  i  1  to  50,  and  in  viii  we  have  another  series  of  family 
collections,  in  which  the  arrangement  is  less  regular,  and  the  Agni 
hymns  do  not  necessarily  stand  first.  These  collections  are  on  the 
average  much  shorter  than  the  series  first  mentioned. 

The  ninth  mandala  contains  only  hymns  addressed  to  So?na 
Pavamana.  It  has  been  thought,  not  without  reason,  that  this 
book  marks  the  beginning  of  an  attempted  new  recension  of  the 
Rigveda,  in  which  the  whole  body  of  hymns  was  intended  to  be 
arranged  according  to  the  deities  addressed.  It  is  fortunate  for 
historical  investigation  that  this  attempt  was  carried  no  further. 

In  the  tenth  mandala  we  find  a  series  of  collections  arranged 
in  the  descending  order  of  the  number  of  hymns  in  each,  and 
extending  from  x  1  to  x  84.  From  x  85  to  191  we  find  single 
hymns  arranged  in  the  descending  order  of  the  number  of  stanzas 
contained  in  each. 

58.  It  is  clear  that  the  arrangement  of  the  collections  as 
wholes  is  of  little  or  no  importance  to  us,  being  based  almost 
entirely  upon  mechanical  considerations.  Within  each  collection 
also  the  arrangement  is  generally  mechanical,  and  therefore  without 
value.  There  remains  the  possibility  that  the  hymns  in  each 
collection  may  nevertheless  be  on  the  whole  homogeneous:  and 
this  supposition  is  very  generally  confirmed  by  an  examination  of 
the  contents  of  the  separate  collections. 

59.  The  most  striking  features  which  suggest  that  a  collection 
is  homogeneous  are  the  following  : 

(i)     the  use  of  the  family  name  of  the  authors  in  the  separate 
hymns ; 

(ii)    the  use  of  a  special  refrain  verse  ;  and 

(iii)   the  use  of  metres  or  rhythms  peculiar  to  the  collection. 


The  'bardic'  and  ' 'normal'  periods  17 

Some  or  all  of  these  indications  combine  to  confirm  the  ascrip- 
tion of  the  hymns  of  Mandala  vii  to  the  Vasistha  family,  or  (as  we 
may  shortly  express  it)  to  Vasistha :  and  that  of  the  hymns  of 
Mandala  vi  to  Bharadvaja.  In  the  same  way  we  find  reason  to 
ascribe  the  collections  i  36—43,  44 — 50,  viii  1 — 5,  6 — 11,  32 — 34 
and  49 — 59  to  Kanva,  i  165 — 191  to  Mana,  i  58 — 64  and 
74—93  to  Gotama,  viii  19—22  to  Sobhari,  23—26  to  VyasVa, 
35—38  to  Syavasva,  and  x  20 — 26  to  Vimada.  All  these  collec- 
tions are  marked  by  the  fact  that  their  metrical  forms  are  not 
only  different  from  those  which  prevail  in  later  literature,  but  also 
almost  peculiar  to  each  family. 

There  seems  a  presumption  that  all  these  collections  belong  to 
a  period  of  originality  and  rivalry  between  the  bardic  families, 
which  we  may  provisionally  name  the  bardic  period. 

To  this  period  we  should  also  be  inclined  on  metrical  grounds 
to  assign  the  collection  i  127 — 139,  perhaps  to  be  connected  with 
the  name  of  Divodasa;  and  the  hymns  ix  98 — 111,  each  of  which 
corresponds  to  some  one  of  the  collections  in  this  class.  The 
collections  i  140 — 164,  ii,  and  v  each  contain  a  nucleus  of  hymns 
of  similar  metrical  distinctiveness,  which  may  be  ascribed  to  Dir- 
ghatamas,  Grtsamada,  and  Atri  respectively:  but  very  many  of 
the  hymns  in  these  collections  are  of  a  more  normal  character. 

The  composition  of  the  hymns  of  this  group  may  easily  be 
supposed  to  have  extended  over  a  long  period  of  time,  and  in  each 
family  over  several  generations. 

60.  In  other  collections  we  find  that  two  metres  are  almost 
exclusively  employed,  namely,  Tristubh  and  GaVyatii,  and  that  in 
these  there  is  great  regularity  both  of  external  and  internal  form. 
Such  collections  are  i  1—11,  12—23,  24—30,  iii,  iv,  and  ix  1—97. 
Refrain  verses  and  authors'  names  are  very  rare  in  these  collections, 
the  name  of  Kusika  being  on  the  whole  the  most  prominent :  and 
in  the  metre  there  is  little  to  differentiate  one  collection  from 
another.  It  is  natural  to  refer  all  these  hymns  to  the  same 
general  period,  and  to  conceive  it  as  one  in  which  perfection  rather 
than  originality  of  form  was  the  aim.  Such  a  period  would  seem 
to  be  necessarily  later  than  that  last  described,  and  we  name  it 
provisionally  the  normal  period. 

61.  The  groups  i  31 — 35,  94 — 115,  and  those  which  extend 
from  x  33  to  x  84  employ  almost  exclusively  Tristubh  and  Jagati 

a.  2 


1 8  The  '  cretic '  period 

metre,  and  include  a  large  proportion  of  hymns  in  which  cretic 
rhythm  is  favoured.  Authors'  names  are  again  wanting,  though 
refrain  verses  sometimes  occur.  The  linguistic  forms  which 
characterize  the  Atharvaveda  begin  to  appear  with  some  fre- 
quency. Although  these  groups  form  a  comparatively  small  part 
of  the  Rigveda,  they  seem  to  have  a  character  of  their  own,  and 
to  belong  to  a  period  of  transition  which  may  be  provisionally 
named  the  cretic  period,  with  reference  to  the  distinctive  rhythm 
often  found  in  these  hymns. 

62.  Last  in  order,  but  of  well-recognized  importance,  is  that 
part  of  the  Rigveda  which  resembles  in  form  and  character  the 
Atharvaveda.  Its  metrical  characteristics  are  the  'epic'  Anustubh 
and  'contaminated'  Tristubh.  In  many  of  the  hymns,  however, 
these  variations  are  only  occasional,  and  some  hymns,  though 
seldom  such  as  contain  more  than  four  or  five  stanzas,  shew  the 
normal  forms  of  the  Anustubh  and  Tristubh,  and  of  other  metres 
characteristic  of  the  Rigveda  as  a  whole.  The  only  considerable 
group  of  hymns  of  this  type  recognized  by  the  Sarhhita  text  is 
that  of  the  funeral  hymns,  x  14 — 19.  Other  hymns  appear  at  the 
end  of  the  respective  Mam]  alas,  or  of  those  sections  which  comprise 
the  Agni  or  Indra  hymns,  or  are  appended  to  single  hymns  with 
which  they  are  not  homogeneous ;  whilst  a  very  large  proportion 
are  included  in  the  tenth  Mandala.  These  hymns,  as  we  have 
already  noticed  (§  10),  are  usually  ascribed  to  a  later  period 
than  the  rest  of  the  Rigveda,  although  there  is  good  reason  to 
think  them  earlier  in  date  than  the  existing  recension  of  the 
Atharvaveda.  It  does  not,  however,  seem  well  to  call  them  here 
by  the  name  '  late  Rigveda,'  by  which  we  should  be  pledging  our- 
selves to  conclusions  that  are  merely  provisional.  The  name 
popular  Rigveda  has  recently  been  given  to  these  hymns,  partly 
on  account  of  their  subject-matter,  which  includes  myths,  dramatic 
colloquies,  and  charms,  and  may  therefore  be  supposed  to  appeal 
chiefly  to  the  common  people  :  and  partly  because  of  the  relatively 
modern  form  of  language,  which  at  the  time  must  certainly  have 
had  a  '  popular  '  character,  in  contrast  with  the  '  hieratic  '  diction 
of  the  remaining  hymns.  We  may  use  this  convenient  title,  but 
must  not  forget  to  mention  that  in  this  part  of  the  Rigveda  are 
also  contained  some  abstruse  philosophical  and  cosmogonical 
speculations. 


Workmanship  of  the  bards  19 

63.  We  have  thus  outlined  a  rearrangement  of  the  contents 
of  the  Rigveda  into  four  principal  groups,  each  containing  sub- 
divisions corresponding  to  the  arrangement  of  the  text  of  the 
Rigveda  itself.  This  rearrangement  is  necessarily  tentative,  and 
the  titles  given  to  each  group  are  intended  merely  to  facilitate 
reference  and  to  aid  the  memory.  Such  titles  as  'bardic'  and 
'  popular '  may  easily  be  found  misleading  if  they  are  supposed  to 
indicate  in  any  adequate  way  the  general  history  of  Vedic  poetry 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  developement  of  social  institutions : 
such  a  study  lies  beyond  the  purpose  of  this  book. 


(iv)    The  Historical  Developement  of  the  Art  of 
Versification. 

64.  The  time  has  perhaps  hardly  come  when  a  fair  estimate 
can  be  made  of  the  literary  and  aesthetic  powers  of  the  Vedic  bards: 
but  it  is  important  to  examine  the  conditions  of  the  mechanical 
problems  presented  to  them,  and  to  form  some  estimate  of  the  skill 
shewn  by  them  in  handling  their  material.  The  sketch  already 
given  of  the  metrical  contents  of  the  Rigveda  has  shewn  that  each 
period,  except  the  'normal'  period,  was  inventive.  The  bards  were 
occupied  in  constructing  fresh  metrical  schemes,  as  well  as  in 
producing  verse  following  established  models.  They  frequently 
compare  their  craft  to  the  highest  kind  of  workmanship  known 
to  them,  that  displayed  in  the  construction  of  a  war-chariot :  and 
they  shew  confidence  that  a  '  new '  song  will  be  more  pleasing  to 
the  gods  than  one  which  is  old-fashioned.  It  is  a  common-place 
of  Western  criticism  that  in  many  of  the  mechanical  arts  the 
Hindu  workman  follows  too  submissively  ancient  rules  and  models. 
But  no  such  statement  can  justly  be  made  with  regard  to  the 
poetic  literature  of  India,  either  ancient  or  modern :  rather  the 
faculty  of  inventing  and  appreciating  new  and  delicate  variations 
of  rhythm  seems  to  be  a  special  gift  of  the  race. 

65.  The  comparison  of  the  earlier  parts  of  the  Avesta  indicates 
that  the  first  Vedic  poets  were  not  far  from  the  period  when  verse 
was  measured  solely  by  the  number  of  syllables,  without  any 
regard  to  their  quantity.  We  have  already  noticed  (§32)  that 
the  quantity  of  initial  and  final  syllables  is  always  indifferent  in 

2—2 


20  Metrical  motives 

the  Rigveda,  and  we  have  every  reason  to  suppose  that  this  feature 
is  inherited  from  the  earlier  period  of  purely  syllabic  measurement. 
But  in  all  other  parts  of  the  verse  we  find  rhythmical  tendencies, 
which  determine  with  varying  regularity  the  quantity  required  in 
each  position. 

66.  The  principle  of  alternation  of  short  and  long  syllables  is 
simple,  and  we  may  well  believe  that  the  Vedic  bards  could  have 
carried  it  to  mechanical  perfection,  had  they  so  desired.  But  in 
addition  they  were  guided  by  other  metrical  motives,  some  of 
which  have  been  described  above  (§§  34,  35).  Above  all,  they  were 
actuated  by  the  desire  to  combine  these  motives,  and  thus  give 
variety  to  their  metre.  We  are  not  perhaps  entitled  to  ascribe 
the  'break'  of  trimeter  verse  to  a  deliberate  design  of  interrupting 
the  iambic  rhythm,  because  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  caesura 
and  the  two  short  syllables  that  follow  it  may  have  been  earlier 
in  date  than  any  such  rhythm.  But  the  '  cretic '  rhythm  certainly 
suggests  a  deliberate  aiming  at  variety  of  form  :  and  if  it  be 
granted  that  the  '  epic '  Anustubh  is  based  upon  the  Anustubh  of 
the  Rigveda  proper,  the  motive  of  the  change  seems  evidently  to 
be  the  same. 

67.  'Contamination'  readily  suggests  careless  workmanship, 
and  may  in  some  cases  have  been  due  to  this  cause.  But  it  is 
also  a  ready  instrument  of  the  inventive  temper.  The  historical 
relation  of  Tristubh  and  JagatI  verse  has  often  been  discussed  : 
and  if  one  of  the  two  is  historically  the  earlier,  the  Tristubh  has 
certainly  the  better  claim  to  this  position.  Either  then  Jagati 
has  been  derived  from  Tristubh  by  contamination  with  dimeter 
cadence,  or  a  dimeter  verse  added  to  a  similar  half-verse  has 
been  assimilated  to  the  rhythm  of  the  Tristubh.  By  one  method 
or  the  other  a  metre  not  without  a  beauty  of  its  own  has  been 
constructed.  The  contamination  at  a  later  period  of  Tristubh 
with  Jagati  did  not  lead  to  the  construction  of  any  harmonious 
metre :  but  perhaps  in  principle  it  is  not  to  be  distinguished  from 
that  mingling  of  the  lyric  metres  from  which  grew  the  Brhatl- 
Satobrhatl  strophe,  which  is  probably  generally  recognized  as  the 
most  beautiful  metrical  form  of  the  Rigveda. 

68.  The  origin  of  the  decasyllabic  verse  is  a  matter  as  to 
which  a  conjecture  will  be  hazarded  later  (Ch.  vili),  but  it  is  only 


Merits  of  Veclic  poetry  21 

through  this  stage  that  we  can  account  at  all  for  the  existence  of 
the  Dvipada  Viraj  or  Pentad  metre,  which  was  actually  brought 
to  as  polished  a  perfection  as  any  metre  of  the  Rigveda. 

69.  In  all  these  cases  it  is  not  hard  to  recognize  that  apparent 
irregularity  is  the  result  of  the  inventive  spirit,  sometimes  leading 
to  the  construction  of  new  and  harmonious  forms,  sometimes 
apparently  ending  in  failure.  This  observation  cannot  fail  to 
suggest  reserve  and  care  before  bringing  forward  any  suggestions 
of  incompetence  against  the  versifiers  or  of  carelessness  against 
the  editors  of  our  text.  It  is  difficult  to  think  that  a  professional 
bard  should  without  motive  have  left  his  verse  with  an  irregular 
rhythm,  when  any  European  scholar,  without  serious  practice 
of  the  art  of  versification,  can  put  it  into  order  for  him  with 
hardly  a  perceptible  alteration  in  the  meaning.  It  is  also  difficult 
to  think  that  professional  reciters  and  their  instructors  could  by 
mere  accident  have  left  stanzas  in  a  shape  which  must  make  them 
a  perpetual  burden  to  the  memory.  In  these  'irregularities'  there 
may  be  meanings  not  easily  recognized,  and  for  this  reason  they 
deserve  to  be  carefully  studied. 

70.  To  whatever  conclusions  we  may  further  be  led  in  detail, 
it  must  be  plain  that  as  works  of  mechanical  art  the  metres  of  the 
Rigveda  stand  high  above  those  of  modern  Europe  in  variety  of 
motive  and  in  flexibility  of  form.  They  seem  indeed  to  bear  the 
same  relation  to  them  as  the  rich  harmonies  of  classical  music  to 
the  simple  melodies  of  the  peasant.  And  in  proportion  as  modern 
students  come  to  appreciate  the  skill  displayed  by  the  Vedic  poets, 
they  will  be  glad  to  abandon  the  easy  but  untenable  theory  that 
the  variety  of  form  employed  by  them  is  due  to  chance,  or  the 
purely  personal  bias  of  individuals :  and  to  recognize  instead  that 
we  find  all  the  signs  of  a  genuine  historical  developement,  that  is 
of  united  efforts  in  which  a  whole  society  of  men  have  taken  part, 
creating  an  inheritance  which  has  passed  through  the  generations 
from  father  to  son,  and  holding  up  an  ideal  which  has  led  each  in 
turn  to  seek  rather  to  enrich  his  successors  than  to  grasp  at  his 
own  immediate  enjoyment.     If  this  was  so,  then  the  Vedic  bards 

also  are  to  be  counted  amongst '  great  men,  and such  as  sought 

out  musical  tunes,  and  set  forth  verses  in  writing.' 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE   POPULAR  RIGVEDA. 

71.  The  '  popular  Rigveda '  consists  of  hymns  which  contain 
about  one-sixth  part  of  the  matter  of  the  Rigveda,  and  are  marked 
out  from  the  remainder  by  differences  of  language,  metre,  and 
subject,  and  by  their  position  in  the  collection.  Of  these  hymns 
a  large  proportion  are  repeated  in  the  first  nineteen  books  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  often  with  slight  differences  in  the  arrangement  of 
the  stanzas  and  in  phraseology :  and  in  their  general  character 
these  hymns  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  the  remaining  verse 
portions  of  the  Atharvaveda. 

72.  The  hymns  which,  according  to  the  definition  just  given, 
plainly  belong  to  the  popular  Rigveda  are  the  following,  those  of 
which  either  the  whole  or  more  than  one  stanza  is  repeated  in  the 
Atharvaveda  being  distinguished  by  the  affixed  letter  a : — 

i23i6-i8a,  19-21  a,  22-24  a,  50  10-13 a,  162,  163a,  164a,  191a; 
ii  32  6-8  a,  42,  43  ;  iii  53  17-21,  22-23  i  iv  18&gt;  5?  4-8  a ;  v  40 
5-9,  78  5-9  ;  vi  28  1-7  a,  8  a,  47  26-28  a,  29-31  a,  74  a,  75  a  ;  vii  50, 
55  5-8  a,  59  12  a,  103,  104  a;  viii  58,  59  6-7,  91  a;  ix  5  8-11, 
67  31-32,  112,  113,  114;  x  9  6-7  a,  8-9  a,  10a,  14  i-i2a,  i3~i6a, 
15a,  16  i-ioa,  n-i4a,  17a,  18a,  19,  244-6,  34,  42  9-na,  56  4-7, 
57  a,  58,  59  5-10,  60  7-12  a,  71,  72,  81,  82,  83  a,  84  a,  85  a, 
86,  87  i-2ia,  88,  90  i-i5a,  16  a,  97  a,  98,  103  a,  107  a,  109  a, 
114,  117,  121a,  125  a,  128  a,  129,  130,  135,  136,  137  a,  142 
7-8a,  145a,  146,  151,  152a,  154a,  155,  158,  159,  161a,  162, 
163  a,  164  a,  165  a,  166,  169,  173  a,  174  a,  177,  181-183,  184  a, 
186,    189  a,    190,    191    2-4  a. 

Sufficient  evidence  in  each  case  is  indicated  in  the  '  Table 
of  Hymns '  at  the  end  of  the  book. 

73.  In  srme  hymns  and  fragments  a  doubt  arises  as  to 
whether  they  should  be  referred  to  the  popular  Rigveda  or  not, 
either  because  the  characteristic  features  of  the  two  groups  of 
hymns  are  mixed,  or  because  they  are  almost  or  entirely  wanting. 


Doubtful  hymns  23 

Although  hymns  of  this  kind  are  on  the  whole  fairly  numerous, 
yet  relatively  they  form  only  a  small  part  of  the  Rigveda,  and  do 
not  affect  the  broad  contrast  between  the  two  groups. 

The  difficulties  that  occur  differ  in  kind  according  as  they 
affect  large  or  small  amounts  of  matter. 

In  the  case  of  long  hymns  and  collections  of  hymns  characteristic 
features  must  necessarily  occur  with  fair  frequency,  and  difficulty 
only  arises  when  the  features  of  the  opposite  groups  are  found  in 
the  same  hymn  or  collection.  In  such  cases  the  general  inference 
must  be  that  the  hymn  or  collection  belongs  to  a  transition  period, 
as  for  instance  the  collections  i  31 — 35,  i  94 — 115,  and  those  which 
extend  generally  from  x  35  to  x  84,  which  we  have  already  assigned 
to  the  ■  cretic '  period  (§  61).  Here  the  only  real  doubt  is  whether 
the  transition  period  lies  nearer  to  the  one  or  the  other  of  the  two 
main  groups:  and  this  question  is  clearly  one  which  should  be 
reserved  to  a  late  stage  of  our  enquiry. 

But  in  the  case  of  short  hymns,  and  still  more  in  that  of 
detached  verses,  characteristic  features  may  be  altogether  wanting, 
or  so  scanty  as  to  give  room  for  the  play  of  chance.  If  however  we 
can  group  together  in  any  way  these  shorter  hymns  and  fragments, 
it  is  possible  that  a  general  character  will  come  to  light  in  the 
group  as  a  whole.  For  example,  the  single  Tristubh  stanzas 
appended  to  many  hymns,  taken  together,  resemble  in  character 
the  Rigveda  proper :  whereas  the  corresponding  Anustubh  stanzas 
resemble  the  popular  Rigveda.  Such  generalizations  are  often  of 
use  in  determining  roughly  the  position  of  the  single  stanzas, 
although  the  inference  may  not  be  finally  justified  in  certain 
cases. 

In  drawing  up  a  definitive  list  of  the  hymns  of  the  '  popular 
Rigveda,'  we  are  going  further  than  our  general  theory,  strictly 
understood,  permits  us.  In  the  first  place  the  two  groups  of 
hymns  are  not  sharply  divided,  but  overlap.  In  the  second  place 
the  evidence  available,  when  analyzed,  consists  of  probabilities 
only:  and  though  the  concurrence  of  many  probabilities  con- 
stitutes historical  certainty,  this  concurrence  is  not  existent  in 
all  details. 

Against  this  theoretical  objection  must  be  set  the  great 
practical  convenience  of  a  definitive  list,  in  which  the  errors 
can  only  be  relatively  few.  In  order  to  deal  with  the  doubtful 
hymns  it  will  be  desirable  to  review  the  evidence  available. 


24  The  linguistic  evidence 

74.  First  in  practical  importance  stand  divergences  of  language, 
in  which  we  include  both  grammar  and  vocabulary.  These  are  so 
numerous  that  there  are  few  stanzas  in  the  Rigveda  which  do  not 
contain  one  or  two :  and  though  the  evidence  of  a  small  number 
of  instances  is  not  final,  yet  it  is  of  great  value  in  giving  in  almost 
all  cases  a  first  presumption  as  to  the  class  to  which  a  hymn 
belongs.  In  §§  84 — 87  will  be  found  lists  of  the  distinctive 
linguistic  features  of  each  class  of  hymns,  drawn  up  upon 
principles  which  are  mainly  mechanical,  and  therefore  free  from 
the  influence  of  personal  bias,  though  subject  in  detail  to  the 
occasional  play  of  chance :  and  in  the  '  Table  of  Hymns '  will 
be  found  stated  the  number  of  instances  of  each  kind  to  be 
found  in  the  hymns  and  stanzas,  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  to 
treat  them  separately.  It  remains  to  consider  how  much  im- 
portance can  be  attached  to  this  kind  of  evidence  in  individual 
cases. 

75.  An  examination  of  the  distinctive  grammatical  forms  as 
a  whole  shews  us  that  the  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  proper  record  an 
earlier  stage  in  the  developement  of  the  Sanskrit  language ;  for 
they  shew  that  multiplicity  of  form  in  the  stem-formation  and 
flexion  both  of  nouns  and  verbs  which  marks  the  earlier  history 
of  all  Indo-European  languages.  The  unthematic  flexional  forms 
of  nouns,  and  the  extended  use  of  the  perfect,  aorist,  subjunctive, 
and  infinitive  systems  in  verbs  are  particularly  conspicuous.  On 
the  other  hand  the  language  of  the  popular  hymns,  though  enriched 
by  certain  sounds  hardly  known  to  the  Rigveda  proper,  shews  a 
tendency  to  uniformity,  obtained  by  the  steady  progress  of  certain 
favoured  types  in  destroying  or  assimilating  their  rivals. 

76.  The  differences  of  vocabulary  lead  directly  to  a  somewhat 
different  conclusion.  Here  divergence  of  style  and  subject-matter 
seem  more  prominent.  Amongst  the  '  popular '  words  are  a  great 
number  of  Indo-European  origin  which  must  certainly  have  been 
familiar  to  the  poets  of  the  '  Rigveda  proper/  though  seldom  used 
by  them,  having  to  do  with  the  familiar  objects  and  activities  of 
ordinary  life.  Hence  we  are  led  to  the  contrast  between  the 
'  heroic '  and  the  '  popular '  language,  and  to  the  possibility  that 
both  may  have  been  simultaneously  in  use  for  different  purposes. 
Other  words,  however,  support  the  inference  of  earlier  date  already 
drawn  from  the  grammatical  forms:    nor  is  it   possible  to  draw 


The  metrical  evidence  25 

a  line  between  the  two  classes,  which  are  in  practice  associated  in 
all  the  hymns  in  which  they  occur. 

77.  As  older  words  and  forms  may  appear  in  later  hymns 
either  by  direct  imitation  of  particular  models  or  by  the  un- 
conscious effect  of  literary  tradition,  so  the  '  popular '  words  at 
least  may  find  a  place  in  the  older  hymns  under  the  influence  of 
some  special  subject-matter,  and  even  later  words  and  forms  by 
anticipation  of  linguistic  developements  not  yet  established  in 
literature.  Amongst  ourselves  '  Bible '  phraseology  is  still  found 
in  much  current  literature,  whilst  our  lexicographers  find  many 
so-called  'American'  neoterisms  in  early  English  records.  In 
particular  passages  a  minute  criticism  of  the  separate  words  and 
forms  can  lead  to  no  practical  result:  and  therefore  in  doubtful 
cases  linguistic  evidence  seems  to  be  of  comparatively  small 
importance.  But  in  judging  of  large  quantities  of  matter  its 
cumulative  weight  is  considerable ;  and  this  appears  to  make  it 
certain  that  as  a  whole  the  popular  Rigveda  is  really  of  later  date. 

78.  The  evidence  of  metre  is,  on  the  whole,  more  cogent  than 
that  of  language :  for  though  the  external  form  of  older  hymns 
may  be  occasionally  imitated  later,  yet  this  would  seem  to  be 
impossible  as  regards  the  rhythm :  for  the  younger  poet  either 
did  not  appreciate  the  rhythms  used  by  his  predecessors,  or  desired 
to  improve  them.  The  characteristic  metres  of  the  popular  Rigveda 
have  been  described,  viz.  the  'epic'  Anustubh  in  all  its  stages 
(§  41),  and  the  '  contamination  '  of  Tristubh  metre  by  JagatI  (§  54). 
In  Anustubh  verse  a  single  occurrence  of  a  long  7th  syllable  in 
1  semi -cadence '  is  a  decided  indication  of  popular  character,  whilst 
the  absence  of  a  short  3rd  syllable  in  several  successive  'reopenings' 
is  almost  as  significant.  On  the  other  hand  too  much  stress  must 
not  be  laid  on  single  instances  of  contamination  in  trimeter  verse, 
for  these  are  not  uncommon  in  the  hymns  assigned  to  the  'cretic' 
period. 

There  seems  every  reason  to  suppose  that  the  metres  of  the 
popular  Rigveda  are  directly  derived  from  those  of  the  Rigveda 
proper,  and  consequently  of  later  date. 

79.  The  repetition  of  a  complete  hymn  or  fragment,  or  even 
of  any  part  of  it  beyond  one  stanza,  in  the  Atharvaveda  is  a  strong 
indication  of  the  later  date.     It  appears  from  the  list  in  §  72  that 


26  The  evidence  of  subject-matter 

more  than  one  half  of  the  hymns  which  clearly  belong  to  the 
popular  Rigveda  are  repeated  with  more  or  less  completeness  in 
the  Atharvaveda:  whilst  of  those  hymns  which  clearly  belong  to 
the  Rigveda  proper  only  about  a  dozen  are  repeated,  except  by 
the  quotation  of  single  stanzas,  viz.  i  22  16 — 18,  19 — 11,  32,  50 
1—9,  154;  iv  2;  v  46  7 — 8;  vi  68  10— n  ;  vii  32;  viii  24;  x  40. 
Single  stanzas  are  drawn  by  the  Atharvaveda  from  all  parts  of  the 
Rioveda,  but  the  repetition  of  such  stanzas  in  the  Atharvaveda 
is  still  of  some  weight,  especially  if  they  appear  in  the  Rigveda  to 
be  detached  from  their  context. 

80.  To  the  position  of  hymns  and  fragments  in  the  Samhita 
text  considerable  importance  is  to  be  attached.  As  we  observe 
that  the  hymns  which  plainly  belong  to  the  popular  Rigveda  are 
almost  all  found  in  certain  positions,  namely  at  the  end  of 
complete  collections,  or  of  the  Agni  or  Indra  sections  of  those 
collections,  or  in  the  tenth  Mandala :  it  follows  that  we  are  likely 
to  find  other  hymns  of  the  same  character  similarly  placed.  Hymns 
which  disturb  the  mechanical  arrangement  of  each  collection  also 
deserve  careful  examination.  With  regard  to  that  arrangement 
it  will  be  sufficient  to  refer  to  the  full  discussion  by  Professor 
H.  Oldenberg  (Prolegomena,  Chapter  11)  as  a  starting  point :  but 
it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  many  of  the  oldest  hymns  in  the 
Rigveda  are  found  either  out  of  the  order  or  in  the  tenth  Mandala, 
as  is  conclusively  shewn  by  the  language  and  metre. 

81.  It  is  only  when  other  indications  fail  that  a  consideration 
of  the  subject-matter  of  the  poems  becomes  necessary.  There  is 
clearly  a  presumption  that  '  hymns '  in  the  strict  sense,  that  is 
poems  in  which  the  praise  of  the  gods  is  the  primary  object,  belong 
to  the  Rigveda  proper :  but  this  presumption  fails  when  the  deity 
is  not  known  to  or  not  homogeneous  with  the  Pantheon  of  the 
Rigveda.  So  there  is  a  presumption  that  '  charms,'  that  is  poems 
in  which  the  profit  of  the  suppliant  or  the  harming  of  his  enemy 
is  the  primary  object,  belong  to  the  popular  Rigveda :  but  even 
amongst  the  early  hymns  we  find  a  few  in  which  relief  from  pains 
of  conscience  or  disease  is  the  main  theme.  Mythological  narra- 
tions and  dramatic  dialogues  are  not  entirely  wanting  in  the 
Rigveda  proper,  though  they  are  much  more  common  later :  whilst 
the  converse  appears  to  be  true  of  poems   with  liturgical  and 


The  evidence  of  subject-matter  27 

ceremonial  subjects.     Philosophical  and  cosmogonical  poems,  and 
those  which  contain  proverbs  or  riddles,  are  generally  late. 

82.  To  discuss  at  any  length  the  evidence  affecting  particular 
hymns  would  exceed  the  scope  of  this  book,  but  there  will  be 
found  in  §  88  a  list  of  all  those  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  with  regard 
to  which  reasonable  doubt  seems  to  exist:  and  an  asterisk  is 
prefixed  to  those  which  appear  to  be  more  properly  assigned  to 
the  popular  Rigveda.  The  evidence  of  language  and  metre  is 
given  in  the  '  Table  of  Hymns  'at  the  end  of  this  book,  and  this 
table  should  also  be  consulted  in  each  case. 

In  those  cases  in  which  the  evidence  is  not  quite  sufficient  to 
justify  us  in  assigning  a  hymn  to  the  papular  Rigveda,  it  will 
generally  be  probable  that  it  is  not  very  much  earlier  in  date,  and 
therefore  that  we  may  have  reason  to  refer  it  later  to  some  period 
other  than  that  of  the  earliest  literature,  that  is,  either  to  the 
*  normal '  or  the  '  ere  tic '  period. 


APPENDIX   I. 

THE  LINGUISTIC  EVIDENCE  OF  DATE. 

83.     Notes. 

The  lists  given  in  the  following  sections  84 — 87  are  drawn  up  upon 
the  mechanical  principles  described  by  the  author  in  Kuhrvs  Zeitschrift 
N.  F.  xvii  4,  pp.  436,  437,  and  give  in  a  corrected  and  amplified  form 
the  lists  on  pp.  440 — 452  in  the  same  article. 

References  to  the  occurrences  in  the  Rigveda  are  only  given  when 
they  are  not  readily  accessible  in  such  works  as  Grassmann's  Worter- 
buch  zum  Rigveda,  Lanman's  Noun- Inflection  in  the  Veda,  and  Avery's 
Verb- Inflection  in  Sanskrit. 

The  Valakhilya  hymns  are  counted  as  hymns  belonging  to  the 
eighth  Mandala,  that  is,  as  viii  49 — 59  inclusive.  Consequently  the 
remaining  hymns  of  the  Mandala  are  counted  as  viii  60 — 103,  not  as 
viii  49 — 92.  This  reckoning  agrees  with  Aufrecht's  second  edition  of 
the  Rigveda  (Bonn,  1877),  and  with  Max  Miiller's  editions  and  Index, 

An  asterisk  *  is  prefixed  to  all  references  to  passages  in  the  popular 
Rigveda.  An  asterisk  prefixed  to  a  word  or  form  denotes  that  it  is 
found  in  the  popular  Rigveda  only. 

A  dagger  f  marks  occurrences  which  depend  upon  correction  of 
the  text. 

Words  and  forms  are  accented  when  any  of  the  occurrences  are 
accented. 

In  lists  of  compounds  the  Pada-patha  forms  are  often  given  for 
convenience  of  tabulation. 

In  reckoning  the  number  of  occurrences  Aufrecht's  printed  text  is 
followed,  so  that  the  refrain  stanzas  and  verses  which  are  found  in 
many  hymns  are  as  a  rule  only  counted  once.  Where  one  or  more 
verses  are  repeated  many  times  in  a  single  hymn,  three  occurrences  are 
reckoned. 

The  forms  connected  with  metrical  restoration  are  omitted  here,  as 
the  subject  is  treated  in  the  later  chapters  of  this  book. 


84.    A.     Forms  characteristic  of  the  Rigveda  proper. 

1.     From   nouns   in    -a,   the   instrumental   singular   masculine   or 
neuter  in  -a.     Masc.  ghana  i  8  3b,  36  16a,  63  5d,     ix  97  16c;  ghrnti 


Forms  indicating  early  date  20 

i  52  6a,  141  4d,  iv  43  6b,  v  73  5d,  ix  107  20c ;  candrd  fiv  48  lc ; 
camasd  x  25  4e ;  yajnd  i  168  la  bis,  vi  48  la  bis ;  himti  x  37  10b, 
68  10a.  Neuter:  ukthd  iv  33  10a,  kavitvd  x  124  7a,  ratnadheyd  iv 
34  lb,  rdthid  i  53  9d,  vivid  i  80  15b,  vrsatvd  i  54  2d,  sakhid  iv  16 
20c,  viii  86  Id,  x  23  7a.  sarvarathd  v  35  5c,  x  160  lb,  suMvd  *x 
141  4b :  in  -tvand ;  kavitvand  viii  40  3c,  taranitvd  i  110  6c,  mahit- 
vand,  vrsatvand  viii  15  2c.  The  form  mahitvd  appears  to  remain 
longer  in  use.  For  details  see  Lanman's  Nomi- Inflection  in  the  Veda, 
pp.  334 — 337 :  some  of  the  instances  are  uncertain. 

2.  Old  declensional  forms  from  radical  stems  in  -d,  -a :  viz.  the 
dat.  sing,  in  -e,  in  klldlape,  de,  dhiyamdhe,  pasu-se,  sucipe,  subhamye, 
havirde ;  the  gen.  and  abl.  sing,  in  -ah,  -ah,  in  krstiprdh,  jdspdti, 
jdspatyd,  pasusdh  ;  the  voc.  sing,  in  -a,  in  rtupd,  bhuridd,  sukraputapd, 
sucipa,  svtapd,  somapd ;  the  instrum.  pi.  in  -dbhih,  in  agrepdbhih, 
rtupabhih,  gopdbhih  :  the  loc.  pi.  in  -dsu,  in  dtdsu :  the  dat.  pi.  in 
-abhyah,  in  bhuriddbhyah. 

3.  Comparatives  and  superlatives  in  -atara,  -atama,  in  asvadd-, 
asvasd-,  indrapd-,  ojodd-,  madhupd-,  ratnadhd-,  varivodhd-,  vasudd-. 
vdjasd-,  saddsd-,  sarvadhd-,  sahasradd-,  sahasrasd-,  sugopd-,  somapd-. 

4.  The  accusative  singular  mahdm. 

5.  The  instrumental  singular  in  -i,  text  often  -i,  see  §  158,  in 
dcitti,  dprabhuti,  *avyathi,  dhuti,  isdnl,  iipasruti,  updbhrti,  uti,  rjunlti, 
citti,  *just%,  tapani,  trivisti,  didhiti,  diistuti,  dustuti,  dhiti,  ?iitiktl,  nisiti, 
pd/rivisti,  purojiti,  prdniti,  prdbhutl,  prdyatj,  prdyuktl,  prdyutl,  mati, 
vartani,  vdsatkrtl,  visti.  viti,  vrsti,  sdkfl,  sakti,  sdnil,  s'rustl,  sadhdstutl, 
sadhri,  sdhuti,  sudlti,  suriitl,  supaptani,  suprdnifo,  sumati,  *sumiti, 
suvrkti,  sus'dml,  susasti,  sustuti,  smdddisti,  haviskrtl,  hdstacyuti,  heti. 

In  some  cases  similar  forms  can  be  restored  by  the  aid  of  the 
metre  :  viz.  asdnl,  navati,  ndvyasl,  prdmati,  saptati,  sumati,  hiranydyi ; 
for  the  occurrences  see  §  139  iii. 

6.  The  forms  arydh,  dvyah  from  stems  in  art-,  avi-. 

7.  The  locative  sing,  in  -d,  before  consonants,  and  at  the  end  of 
the  verse. 

8.  The  ablative  or  genitive  singular  in  -vah  from  -u  stems,  in 
mddhvah,  vdsvah. 

9.  The  neuter  plural  in  -u  (-u  is  rarely  correct,  see  §  159),  in  uru, 
rju,  cdru,  tridhdtu,  purU  (puru),  *bahu,  *mddhu,  vdsu,  vilu,  sdnu, 
suddtu,  suhdntu  :  and  from  a  radical  stem  mayobhu. 

10.  The  form  dive-dive. 

1 1 .  The  vocative  in  -vah,  -mah  from  stems  in  -vant,  -mant.  From 
stems  in  -vant  in  adri-,  rsi-,  gnd-,  tavisi-,  niyut-,  marut-,  rayi-,  vajri-, 
vira-,  sakti-,  saci-,  saras-,  sahas-,  svadhd-,  hari-vah :  from  stems  in  -mant 
in  tuvis-,  dyu-,  bhdnu-,  mantu^,  sucis-,  havis-mah. 

12.  The  instrumental  tud  (only  in  the  phrase  tud  yujd):  compounds 
in  tud-,  namely  tud-isita,  -uta,  -datta,  -data,  -vrdha,  -hata,  and  indra- 
tuota,  in  which  tud-  has  instrumental  meaning  :  also  tud-diita,  -nid, 
-vasu.     So  too  yuvd-datta,  -nlta,  -yiij  ;  yusmd-isita,  -uta,  -datta,  -nlta. 


30  Forms  indicating  early  date 

13.  The  forms  mdhya,  tubhya,  asmdbhya,  sometimes  found  in  the 
text  in  Sandhi  combination,  sometimes  to  be  restored  in  accordance 
with  the  metre. 

The  occurrences  in  which  these  forms  are  suggested  by  the  metre 
are  as  follows  :  mdhya  i  22  8d  ;  iv  5  2a,  42  2a ;  v  52  10c  ;  vi  27  8b, 
46  9c,  47  10a;  viii  1  32a,  26  12c;  ix  32  6b;  x  39  6b,  49  lb.  tubhya 
i  68  6a,  129  3d;  iii  14  2b,  30  20c,  35  7d,  62  7c;  iv  3  16a,  17  la; 
v  6  5d,  29  5a;  vi  20  13c,  40  la;  vii  29  la,  32  21c,  90  2b;  viii  2 
30b,  39  3a;  ix  88  la;  x  7  2a,  116  7a  7c,  148  4a.  asmdbhya  i  10  8d, 
48  9c,  63  8c,  81  6c,  114  5d,  117  2d;  iv  55  8c ;  vi  53  5c  =  6c  =  7c,  71 
6b;     vii  74  5d,  78  Id,  79  4a,  81  6b;     viii  67  19a,  84  6b;     x  56  2b. 

14.  The  following  pronominal  forms :  yuvoh,  ayd  (pronoun  and 
adverb)  had,  and  ndkih. 

15.  Many  monosyllabic  stems  remain  in  use  in  classical  Sanskrit, 
but  a  large  number  are  peculiar  to  the  Rigveda.  These  include  several 
common  words,  viz.  ksd,  tmdn  (with  purutmdn),  nid  (with  devanid), 
pfks  (with  supfks),  pft  (with  prtsutur),  mdh  (with  the  adverb  malidh), 
vfdh  (with  the  infinitive  vrdhe),  and  sridh  (with  asridh)  ;  and  nearly 
all  the  words  which  are  rare  even  in  the  Rigveda,  viz.  dmh,  arc,  id,  ud, 
kfp,  ksdp,  ksip,  ksu,  ksdbh,  ksmd  (in  ksmdh),  khd,  gdh,  gfbh,  gmd  (in 
gmdh),  jn&amp;s,  jmdn  (with  j may d,  the  verb  jmdy  and  pdrijman),  tdr,  tuc, 
tuj,  tur,  trd,  ddn,  dd,  dds,  du,  *nddh,  ndbh,  nds,  ndbh,  pas,  pis,  pur, 
pre,  psur,  bddh  (with  jiiubddh,  paribddh,  somaparibddh),  bhid,  bhis, 
bhuj,  bhrdj,  mtt,  mih,  mur,  mils,  mfc,  yd,  ran,  rit,  rip,  ris,  rdp,  van, 
vds,  vij,  vid,  vip,  vft  (with  vrtariisayd),  vfs,  vrd,  sds,  sdh,  sU,  star,  sti 
(with  stipd),  stut,  stubh,  sthd,  srit,  hr&amp;t. 

16.  Stems  in  -asi :  atasi,  dhartiasi,  1  dhdsi,  2  dftasi,  sanasi. 

1 7.  Stems  in  -dyia :  atasdyia,  ahnavdyid,  dkdyia,  uttamayia, 
trayaydyia,  daksdyia,  didhisdyia,  nrpdyia,  panaydyia,  pandyia,  puru- 
mdyia,  mahaydyia,  mahdyia,  rasdyia,  vitantasdyia,  viddyia,  sravdyia, 
sprhaydyia.    For  aldyia,  kundapdyia,  bahupdyia  cf.  C  2,  C  3  and  C  22. 

18.  Stems  in  -iman :  ddriman,  dhdrvman,  pdr%man,  bhdrlman, 
vdrlman,  sdriman,  sdviman,  stdrlman,  hdvvman. 

19.  Stems  of  neuter  nouns  in  -tvand:  janitvand,  patitvand,  mar- 
tiatvand,  mahitvand,  vasutvand,  sakhitvand.  The  instrumental  forms, 
as  mahitvand,  are  included  under  No.  1. 

20.  Pronominal  stems  in  -ydt,  -yd,  -yH,  and  -vat,  in  tvaydt,  yusmaydt ; 
tvdyd;  asmayu,  ahamyu,  tvayxi,  yavayu,  yuvayu,  svayd;  tvdvat,  mdvat, 
yuvavat,  yusmavat. 

21.  In  the  case  of  heteroclite  nouns,  forms  belonging  to  the  follow- 
ing stems  :  anarvdn,  puru,  bhuman,  mdnus  (with  mdnurhita,  visvd- 
manus),  mdrta  (with  dmarta,  martabhojana),  mahd,  yaman  (with 
dkhidra-,  dnusra-,  istd-,  usrd-,  dyutdd-,  prthu-,  pro-,  pravdd-,  raghu-, 
said-,  sahdsra-,  su-yaman),  and  sdrdha  (with  sdrdhaniti). 

22.  Unaugmented  forms  of  historic  tenses.  In  the  list  given  by 
J.  Avery  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xi, 
pp.  326 — 361,  the  following  corrections  are  needed:  add  tdksat  i  127 
4e,  vi  12  5b,  dudrdvat  v  50  4b,  navanta  *x  120  2d,  prdthista  x  61  5a, 
bhdrat  v  31   lie,  bhuvat  i  61   14d,  rujdt  ix  34  lc,  vadat  viii  45  5a; 


Forms  indicating  earl//  date  31 

omit  rocata  iv  10  5d.  The  whole  number  of  these  forms  in  the 
Rigveda  appears  to  be  1043,  of  which  32  are  in  the  'popular  Rigveda': 
in  the  independent  parts  of  the  Atharvaveda  there  are  29. 

23.  The  first  person  singular  subjunctive  in  -se :  arcase,  rnjase, 
ohise,  krse,  car  krse,  gr/ilse,  puriise,  ydjase,  stuse,  hise :  sasahise  appears 
to  be  2  p.  sing. 

24.  All  forms  of  the  perfect  subjunctive  active.  For  details  refer 
to  Historical  Vedic  Grammar,  pp.  328 — 330:  here  it  will  as  a  rule 
only  be  necessary  to  quote  one  form  from  each  verb,  namely  cakdnah, 
cikitah,  ciketasi,  jugurat,  jujosah,  jujusan,  jujuvat,  tatdnah  (1  tan), 
tatanah  (2  tan),  alddasah,  dlddyah,  dadhdrsat,  paprcasi,  piprdyah, 
bubodhah,  jabhdrat,  mamandat,  mamdhah,  mumucah,  mumocat,  mumu- 
rat,  rardnah,  vavdnah,  vividat,  vain-dhati,  susuvat,  susravat,  sdsdhah, 
susudah,  paspdrsat,  jaghdnat. 

25.  All  subjunctive,  optative,  and  imperative  forms  of  the  perfect 
middle,    namely    andsamahai,    cakdnanta,     cdkramanta,    caksamlthdh, 

jagraslta,  tatdnanta,  tatdpate,  dadabhanta,  dadhisvd,  dadhidhvam,  dadhi- 
dhve,  dudhuvlta,  piprdyasva,  mdmahanta,  mdmahasva,  mdmahantam, 
mdmrjita,  yuyojate,  rurucanta,  vdvrd/idte,  vdvrdhdnta,  vavrdhdsva, 
vavrdhlthdh,  vdvrdhasva,  sasdmate,  susuclta,  sasahisth&amp;h. 

26.  Perfect  participles  without  reduplication,  except  vidvdms: 
namely  khidvtirhs,  dasvams,  milhvdrhs  (with  mllhusmat),  and  sdhvdms. 

27.  Forms  of  the  second  person  dual  and  plural  of  the  root-aorigt 
having  strong  stems,  namely  kartam,  kdrta,  kdrtana ;  gantdm,  *  gdnta, 
gdntana;  dhdta,  dhdtana;  ydntana;  vartam,  varta;  varktam ;  srota; 
sbta,  sotana;  ahetana,  heta.     For  the  quantity  of  final  vowels  see  §  159.f 

28.  The  aorist  imperative  forms  in  -si,  namely  *kdrsi,  jesi,  josi, 
ddrsi,  daksi,  dhdksi,  naksi,  nesi,  pdrsi,  prdsi,  bhaksi,  mdtsi,  mdsi,  ydksi, 
ydmsi,  yasi,  yotsi,  rdtsi,  rdsi,  vdksi,  vesi,  srosi,  saksi,  sdtsi,  hosi. 

29.  The  aorist  imperative  form  bodhi,  whether  from  budh  or  bhu. 

30.  All  forms  of  the  root-aorist  imperative  middle  :  krsvd  (for  the 
quantity  of  the  final  vowel  see  §  158),  krdhvam  :  trdsva,  trddhvam ; 
dhisvd,  mdtsvd,  mdsva,  ydksva,  yuksvd,  rdsva,  vdrhsva,  saksva  (sac), 
saksva  (sah). 

31.  The  active  participle  of  the  root-aorist :  rdhdnt  (with  rdhddri, 
rdhddvdra),  krdnt,  gmdnt,  citdnt,  dyutdnt  (in  dyutdd-yaman),  dhrsdnt 
(including  dhrsdn-martas,  -varna,  -vin),  pdnt  (from  pa  'drink'),  bhiddnt, 
viddnt  (in  vidddvasu),  vidhdnt,  vrsdnt  (in  vrsadanji),  sthdnt. 

32.  The  middle  participle  of  the  root-aorist,  in  arand,  krand 
(including  krand),  citana,  cydvana,  dyutand,  *dhrsand,  niddnd,  pisand, 
piyana,  prathdnd,  budlmnd,  bhiyand,  manand,  yatdnd,  ydtdna,  yujand, 
yodhand,  rucand,  vipand,  urand,  subhdna,  svitand,  sacand,  sahand,  sdna, 
srjand,  stubhdnd,  sprdhand,  dhrayana. 

One  or  two  forms  remain  in  use  later,  namely  jusand,  dyutdna, 
vidand  :  for  the  last  see  also  D  3.     Whitney  regards  it  as  a  present. 

33.  The  augmented  passive  forms  of  the  root-aorist :  dkdri,  agami, 
dceti,  dchedi,  djani,  djndyi,  ddarsi,  ddhayi,  dpayi,  dbodhi,  dbhraji,  dmoci, 
dmyaksi,  ayami,  dyoji,  drddhi,  aroci,  avdci,  dvari,  avedi,  asoci,  dsrayi^ 
asarji,  dsadi,  asavi,  astdri,  dstdvi,  dhdvi.     Cf.  No.  22  above. 


32  Forms  indicating  early  date 

34.  The  active  participle  of  the  a-aorist,  in  krtddvasu,  guhdda- 
vadya,  trpdnt,  risant,  risant,  *rudhdnt,  vrdhdnt,  sisdnt,  sucdnt,  saddnt, 
sddddyoni,  sdnant  (and  sanddrayi,  sanddvdja),  huvdnt. 

35.  The  middle  participle  in  -sand,  from  the  s-aorist,  and  parti- 
cipial adjectives  of  the  same  form  :  in  area-,  urdhva-,  rnja-,  oha-,  jraya-, 
dhiya-,  nama-,  manda-,  yama-,  rabha-,  vrdha-,  sava-,  saha-sdnd. 

36.  The  infinitives  in  -tdye  and  their  derivatives :  istdye  (and 
vasya-) ;  purvdeittaye ;  maghdttaye,  vdsuttaye,  havydddtaye ;  pltdye 
(and  purvd-,  soma-pltdye) ;  vltdye  (and  devd-vltaye) ;  sdtdye  (and  medhd-, 
vdja-sdtaye). 

37.  The  infinitives  in  -dhyai,  namely  iyd-,  ird-,  isd-,  isdya-,  irdya-, 
ksdra-,  gdma-,  card-,  jard-,  tarhsayd-,  tard-,  duhd-,  dhiyd-,  ndsayd-,  piba-, 
prnd-,  bhdra-,  manda-,  mandayd-,  mddayd ,  ydja-,  risayd-,  vandd-,  var- 
tayd-,  vdha-,  vdjayd-,  vrjd-,  vdvrdhd-,  say  a-,  sued-,  sacd-,  sdha-,  stavd-, 
syandayd-,  huvd-dhyai. 

38.  The  infinitives  in  -vane  :  turvdne,  ddvdne,  dhurvane. 

39.  The  infinitives  in  -se,  -ase :  arhdse,  redse,  rnjdse,  ksddase, 
cardse,  javdse,  jise,  tujdse,  dohdse,  dh&amp;yase,  dhruvdse,  pusydse,  prdkse, 
bhiydse,  bhojdse,  rdjdse,  vrnjdse,  vrdhdse,  s'obhdse,  sriydse,  stuse,  spdrase, 
spurdhdse,  hdrase.     But  cdksase  andjlvdse  remain  in  use  later, 

40.  All  verbal  forms  from  certain  conjugational  stems,  namely  iyar-, 
I-  (in  imahe,  iydnd),  jigd-,  pipl-  (present),  pdva-  (except  the  participle 
pdvamdna),  yuvd-  (from  yu  'join'),  yuyo-  (from  yu  'separate'),  sisac- 
sasc-  (including  asascdt,  dsascat),  sadh-  (not  including  the  causative), 
stdva- :  the  perfect  plpi-  and  its  participle  plpidnd :  the  aorist  pd- 
4  drink'  (except  the  augmented  indicative),  and  the  aorist  optative 
asyd- :  the  desiderative  vivdsa-. 

With  the  flexional  forms  may  be  classed  a  number  of  pronouns  and 
adverbs,  as  these  also  belong  to  the  grammar  of  the  language  : — 

41.  The  pronoun  syd,  tyd. 

42.  Adverbs  in  -vdt,  namely  angiras-,  atri-,  atharva-,  apnavana-, 
rsi-,  aurvabhrgu-,  kanva-,  jamadagni-,  jami-,  nabhdka-,  paka-,  pitr-, 
pur  ana-,  purva ,  priyamedha-,  pratna-,  bharadvdja-,  bhrgu-,  manu-, 
manus-,  yaydti-,  vasistha-,  virupa-,  vyasva-,  sthurayupa-vdt. 

43.  ddha  (ddhd)  in  combination  with  other  particles  (of  which 
tmdnd,  dvitd  are  themselves  old,  see  No.  15  and  below),  namely  ddhd 
Mm,  ddhd  ca,  ddhd  cid,  ddha  tmdnd,  ddha  dvitd,  ddhd  nu,  ddha  smd, 
ddhd  ha  (for  the  quantity  of  the  final  a,  see  §  161):  dnusdk  (and 
sdnusdk),  tu  (tu),  dvitd,  nd  '  as,'  m,aksu  (and  in  maksumgamd,  maksU- 
javas,  maksuyu),  sded  (and  in  sacabhu),  sdtra  (and  in  satrakdrd,  satrdc, 
satra-jit,  -sdh,  -sdha,  -ha,  -hdn),  sim. 


85.    B.     Words  characteristic  of  the  Rigveda  proper. 

1.  akta  'ber,m.' 

2.  atyd  '  swift.' 

3.  ddri  '  stone,'  and  its  compounds  adri-jd,  -juta,  -dugdha,  -bar has, 
*-budhna,  -bhid,  -mdtar,  -suta,  -samhata,  -sdnu. 


Words  indicating  early  date  33 

4.  dndhas  « sap.'     Cf.  D  1 2. 

5.  abhisti   *  help/  and   its   compounds  abhisti-kft,  -dyumna,  -pd, 
-mat,  -savas,  su-abhisti,  su-abhisti-sumna. 

6.  abhika  'face.' 

7.  ara^S  'minister.' 

8.  arusd  '  red,'  and  arusdstupa. 

9.  «r/  (r/,  rzy)  '  stretch.' 

10.  drnas  'stream,'  with  arnasd,  arnovft,  khddo-,  go-,  dhdnu-, 
mddhu-arnas. 

11.  dvas  'help,'  except  the  form  dvase,  which  remains  in  use  later: 
also  avasy,  avasyu,  su-dvas. 

12.  avitdr  and  avitri  '  helper.' 

13.  dvya  'sheep,'  with  avydya  and  dvyaya. 

14.  dsvia  'of  horses.' 

15.  asuria  (text  asuryd)  'lordly,'  and  asuryd  (text  asuryd)  'lordship.' 

16.  ai/w  'age,'  with  dyusdk,  ekayu,  visvdyu,  visvdyuposas,  visvd- 
yuvepas. 

17.  mc?w  'drop.' 

18.  urusy  '  widen,'  urusyd,  and  urusyu. 

19.  ws'y  (proper  name)  with  ausijd. 

20.  ^1  (except  the  dative  ictdye,  which  remains  in  use  later),  with 
an-,  dnti-,  itd-,  urvi-,  satdm-,  sadyd-,  sahdsra-,  sahdsram-,  and  su-uti. 

21.  rjisin  'direct.' 

22.  rtay  'order,'  with  rtayd,  rtayu,  Hay  at,  rtayin,  rtdyti. 

23.  rbhuksdn,  rbhuksd  (proper  name). 

24.  r§vd  '  upright,'  with  rsvd-ojas  and  rsvdvlra. 

25.  &amp;a  'regard,'  with  akdyia  (also  included  in  A  17). 

26.  kiitsa  (proper  name)  with  kutsa-putrd,  -vatsd,  and  kutsid. 

27.  ksiti  '  dwelling,'  with  uru-,  dhdraydt-,  su-ksiti. 

28.  gdbhasti   'arm,'  with  gdbhasti-puta,  and  purnd-,  su-,  sw-,  and 

29.  girdh  'songs  '  in  the  plural :  gir  '  voice '  remains  in  use  in  the 
singular.  Also  compounds  of  gir,  namely  giravfdh,  girvanas,  gir- 
vanasyu,  girvdhas,  muhurgir,  samgir,  and  satydgirvahas. 

30.  gomant  '  rich  in  cattle.' 

31.  cdnas  'delight,'  with  canasy,  cdnistha,  cdnohita. 

32.  Compounds  beginning  or  ending  with  candrd  *  gold  ' ;  namely 
asva-,  puru-,  visvd-,  su-,  svd-,  hdri-candra :  candrd-agra,  -nirnij,  -budhna, 
-ratha,  -vat,  and  -varna.     candrd  itself  remains  in  use  later. 

33.  camu  '  cup,'  with  camusdd. 

34.  carsani  '  mortal,'  with  carsanx-dhft,  -prd,  -sdh,  and  pro-  and 
vi-carsani.     visvdcarsani  remains  in  use  later. 

35.  jur  'aging,'  with  a-,  amd-,  rta-,  dhiyd-,  ni-,  sand-jitr,  and 
djuryat. 

a.  3 


34  Words  indicating  early  date 

36.  tdnaya  'offspring.'     Cf.  D  25. 

37.  tdvisl  'strength,'  with  tdvisi-mat,  -y,  -yd,  -vat  and  dnibhrsta- 
tavisi. 

38.  The  verb  and  adjective  tuj  'grow,'  with  tuji,  tuji,  tunjd, 
tutuji,  tutuji,  dtuji.     The  noun  tuj  remains  in  use  later. 

39.  Compounds  ending  in  -tur  'conquering,'  namely  ap-,  dji-, 
prtsu-,  mithas-,  rajas-,  rat  ha-,  radhra-,  visva-,  vrtra-,  supra-tHr. 

40.  turd  '  strong,'  with  *turd-gatu,  turayd,  turasdh. 

41.  turvdsa  (proper  name)  and  turvdsayddu. 

42.  Compounds  beginning  with  tuvi-,  namely  tuvi-ojas,  -kiirmi, 
-kurmin,  -kratu,  -ksd,  -grd,  -grdbhd,  -yri,  -griva,  -jatd,  -desna,  -dyumnd, 
-nrmnd,  -prati,  -badhd,  -brahman,  -maghd,  -manyu,  -mdtrd,  -mraksd, 
-rddhas,  -vdja,  -sagma,  -susma,  -s'ravas;  tuvistama,  tuvismat ;  tuvisvaiids, 
-svdiii,  -svan ;  tuvi-magha,  -rdva,  -rdvat. 

43.  dams  'excel,'  with  damsdna,  damsdnd,  damsdndvat,  ddmsas, 
ddmsistha,  ddmsu,  ddmsujuta,  ddmsupatnl ;  puruddmsa,  puruddmsas, 
suddmsas. 

44.  dasmd  '  wondrous,' with  dasmdt,  dasmdvarcas,  ddsmia,  puru- 
dasmd. 

45.  dasrd  '  wondrous.' 

46.  daSasy  'do  worship,'  with  dasasyd. 

47.  dM  'do  worship,'  with  ddsu-adhvara,  ddsuri,  ddasu,  ddasuri. 
The  participle  dasvdms  is  already  included  in  A  26,  and  the  noun  das' 
in  A  15. 

48.  durond  '  house,'  with  durona-yu  and  -sad. 

49.  dtivas  '  worship,'  with  duvasy,  duvasyu,  duvoyd,  duvoyti. 

50.  dustdra  '  hard  to  overthrow.' 

51.  devdtdt  and  devdtdti  'divinity.' 

52.  Compounds  beginning  or  ending  with  dyumnd  '  brilliance,' 
namely  abhisti-,  *rta-,  tuvi-,  tvesd-,  vibhuta-,  su-dyumnd ;  dyumnd-vat, 
-vdrdhana,  -irdvas,  -sdh,  -sati,  -huti ;  dyumnin.  The  simple  noun 
dyumnd  remains  in  use  later,  and  also  the  proper  name  *pdsadyumna, 
for  which  see  D  2. 

52L  Compounds  ending  in  -druh  :  a-,  aksnayd-,  antaka-,  dnabhi-, 
abhi-,  asma-,  puru-,  visu-druh. 

54.  dhanv  'run.' 

55.  dhlti  '  insight,'  and  rtddhiti. 

56.  dhtini  '  roaring,'  with  dhunay,  dhuni-mat,  -vrata,  dhunlcuirmrl 
and  dhuntii. 

57.  nary  a  '  heroic,'  and  ndriapas. 

58.  navy  a  and  navy  as  'young.' 

59.  nitya  '  own,'  with  nitya-aritra,  -stotra,  -hotar. 

60.  niy&amp;t  'car,'  with  niyutvat  and  niyudratha.  Cf.  anddvah 
in  D  2. 

61.  nftama  '  most  heroic' 

62.  paty  'rule.' 


Words  indicating  early  date  35 

63.  pdyu  'protector.' 

64.  pavdkd  '  brilliant,'  with  pavdkd-varcas,  -varna,  -focis. 

65.  plti  '  drink,'  with  a-,  purvd-,  sd-piti :  most  of  the  former  are 
already  included  in  A  36  above. 

66.  puramdhi  (proper  name),  with  puramdhivat. 

67.  puruspfh  *  much  desired.' 

68.  purilvdsu  '  very  wealthy.' 

69.  paumsia  'heroic' 

70.  pratnd  '  ancient,'  with  pratndthd.  pratnavdt  is  included  in 
A  42  above. 

71.  prdyas  'sustenance,'  with prdyasvat,  and  ghrtd-,  su-,  hitd-prayas. 

72.  prdsasti  '  plenty,'  with  prasastikft. 

73.  mamh  '  be  mighty,'  with  mamhdna,  mamhanesthd,  maihliaydd- 
rayi,  marhhayu,  mdmhistha,  mdmhistharati,  and  mdmhlyams. 

74.  maghd,  '  wealth.' 

75.  maghdvan  'lord,'  except  as  used  of  Indra. 

76.  matsard  '  excited,'  with  matsardvat  and  matsarin. 

77.  mandrd  'glad,'  with  mandrd-ajani,  -jihva,  -yu,  and purumandrd. 

78.  mdnman  'thought,'  with  manmasdh,  manma-sddhana,  and 
dur-,  yajnd-,  vipra-,  satyd-,  and  su-mdnman. 

79.  Compounds  ending  in  -mahas  'might':  citrd-,  prd-,  mitrd-, 
vdjapra-,  vi-,  vidydt-,  visvd-,  vrddhd-,  su-mahas. 

80.  yajatd  '  worshipful,'  with  ydjatra,  ydjistha,  and  ydjiydms. 

81.  yahti  'quick,'  with  yahvi. 

82.  ranvd  '  pleasing,'  with  ranvdsamdri. 

83.  rddhas  '  wealth,'  with  rddhaspati  and  rdd/iodeya,  and  the  com- 
pounds anavabhrd-,  dsva-,  ghrsvi-,  citrd-,  tuvi-,  pankti-,  viti-,  satyd-, 
su-,  spdrhd-rddhas.     arddhds  remains  in  use  later. 

84.  vaks  'grow.' 

85.  vanus  '  charm,'  with  vanusy. 

86.  vdrivas  'free  room,'  with  varivas-y,  -yd;  varivo-kft,  -dhd,  -vid. 

87.  vdrtis  'path.' 

88.  vdrpas  'wonder,'  with  ghord-,  purio-,  prdtijuti-,  bhuri-,  hdri- 
varpas. 

89.  vdja  'prize,'  with  vdjaydt  and  vdjayu,  and  the  compounds 
citrd-,  jyd-,  tuvi-,  puru-,  bhardd-,  bhdrad-,  satd-,  sandd-,  sa/idsravdja  : 
vdja-kftya,  -gandhia,  -jathara,  -ddt  -ddvan,  -dravinas,  -pati,  -patni,  -pastia, 
-pesas,  -pramahas,  -prasuta,  -bandhu,  -bharman,  vdjarnbhard,  vdja-ratna, 
-vat,  -sravas,  -sruta,  -sdni,  -sd,  -sft.     vdjasati  is  included  in  No.  104. 

90.  vdjinivasu  'liberal.' 

91.  vdra  'hair,  tail,'  with  vdravat,  1.  puruvdra,  1.  vitdvdra. 

92.  vd/ias  '  waggon,'  with  the  compounds  ukthd-,  gir-,  nr-,  bi'dhma-, 
mrktd-,  vipra-,  satydgir-,  sindhu-,  stoma-vdhas.  yajndvahas  is  in  use 
rather  later. 

93.  vipra  *  poet,'  with  vipra-juta,  -marwian,  -rdjia,  -vacas,  -vdhas, 
-vlra  :  a-,  sdma-,  su-vipra. 

3—2 


36  Words  indicating  early  date 

94.  viti   l  obtaining,'   with  vlti-rddhas   and   -hotra,   and   ghauri-, 
devd-,  and  rdtha-viti.     vitdye  is  included  in  A  36. 

95.  vlrdvat  '  rich  in  men.' 

96.  Compounds  in  -vrkti,  namely  ndmo-,  su-,  and  svd-vrkti. 

97.  vrdhd  'furtherer':  vrdhasnu  ;  a-,  kavi-,  namo-,  marud-,  and 
se-vrdha  ;  saddvrdha.     tutivrdha  is  included  in  A  12. 

98.  sdmsa  'praise.' 

99.  sdvas  '  strength,'   with    savasdvat,  savasin,  savasi,  sdvistha  ; 
dpratidhrsta-y  abhisti-,  asdmi-,  dvi-,  ndksatrcv-,  vrddhd-,  satyd-savas. 

100.  susna  (proper  name)  and  susiiahdtya. 

101.  Compounds  ending  in  -socis  :  dgrbhita-,  ajird-,  urdhvd-,  citrd-, 
tigmd-,  dirghdyu-,  duroka-,  pavdkd-,  vrddhd-,  sird-,  sukrd-,  srestha-, 
svd-socis. 

102.  srdvas  'glory,'  with  srdvas-kdma,  -y,  -id,  -yd,  -yu  ;  susravasyd  ; 
srdvistha ;  srava-esd,  sravojit ;  upamd-,  gdthd-,  gurtd-,  citrd-,  tuvi-, 
dlrghd-,  devd-,  dyumnd-,  prthu-,  prathamd-,  prd-,  brhdt-,  vdsu-,  vdja-, 
vrddhd-,  satyd-,  su-srdvas. 

103.  sdtpati  '  master.'     Cf.  D  6. 

104.  sdti  'attainment,'  with  arkd-,  drna-,  tokd-,  dhdna-,  medhd-, 
vdja-,  sdra-sdti.     sdtdye  is  included  in  A  36. 

105.  sdnu  'back,'  with  sdnukd:  also  adri-,  urdhvd-,  pfddku-sdnu : 
snu,  ghrtdsnu,  ghrtasnu. 

106.  sukrdtu  '  wise,'  with  sukratuy  and  sukratuyd. 

107.  sumnd  'blessing.' 

108.  suvitd  'prosperity.' 

109.  suviria  '  heroism.' 

110.  stir  a  'sun,'  and  suracaksas  ;  asurd. 

111.  suri  'lord.' 

112.  stotdr  '  singer. ' 

113.  spdrhd  'desirable,'  with  spdrhdrddhas,  spdrhdvira. 

114.  su-adhvard  'happy  in  the  sacrifice.' 

115.  suarvat  'glorious.' 

116.  haryatd  'desirable.' 

117.  havismat  'bringing  offerings.' 

86.    C.    Forms  characteristic  of  the  popular  Rjgveda 

AND   ATHARVAVEDA. 

1.  All  words  containing  the  palatal  t  (except  vdsat,  srausat,  which 
are  found  in  use  earlier) :  namely  aratvd,  *dghdti,  itdtah,  *kdtuka,  kdtd, 
kikata,  kuta,  *kuta,  *kfplta,  kevata,  birita,  bekandta,  *mahdvaturin, 
*renukakdta,  *vaturi?i,  *vikata,  *sakatt 

2.  Words  containing  nd\  dkhandala,  dndd,  kundapdyia,  kundrndcl, 
*dandd,  *pi?ida,*punddrika,  *manduka,  *m'anduki,  *ma?iduradhdnika, 
mdrtdndd,  sdndika,  sdndd,  hiranyapindd. 


Forms  indicating  late  date  37 

3.  Words  containing  /,  excepting  the  following,  which  are  estab- 
lished in  use  in  the  Rigveda  proper :  ulokd,  kaldSa,  kila,  kevala,  jdldsa, 
riila,  palitd,  phaligd,  bahuld,  -misla,  void,  valg,  vitfpdld,  s%oka.  A  list 
of  other  words  containing  I  is  given  in  Historical  Vedic  Grammar, 
pp.  258,  259  :  dlarsi,  dlarti,  and  dvicacali  are  to  be  added  to  it. 

4.  Duals  in  -au  before  consonants  or  at  the  end  of  an  even  pada. 
To  the  lists  given  in  Lanman's  Noun-Inflection  in  the  Veda  pp.  340, 
341,  342,  and  576  are  to  be  added  astau,  *kaijL,  *dvau,  nau.  Before 
vowels  (except  u)  -dv  is  found  throughout  the  Rigveda :  but  see  §§  1 28, 1 29. 

5.  Case-forms  in  -yai  (-iai),  -yah  (-iah),  -yam  (-idm)  from  nouns 
with  -i  stems :  *dnumatyah,  dratiah,  turyai,  devdhutiai,  *ndbhyah, 
*nirrtyai,  *nirrtyah,  pustyai,  pfhiyah,  bhujyai,  bhrtyai,  *bhrtydm, 
yuvatyah,  yuvatydm,  srutyai,  sdmgatyam.  Forms  from  bhumi,  bsadhi, 
heti  are  included  in  10  and  D  12,  52  below. 

6.  The  accusative  divam. 

7.  The  accusative  plural  dpah. 

8.  The  locative  form  mayi. 

9.  Nouns  adapted  to  stems  in  -a :  (a)  in  -anta ;  tarantd,  *ddnta, 
*panta,  *vasantd,  *vaisantd,  sdmanta,  *hemantd :  (b)  compounds  in 
-aksd  *  eye ' ;  adhi-,  an-,  catu?'-,  bhuri-,  sad-,  *sam-,  sahasra-,  hiranya- 
aksd :  (c)  compounds  in  -yajd,  -raja ;  ati-,  *anu-,  jiva-,  *pra-yajd : 
*adhirajd,  rajakd :  (d)  *pada,  with  *nipadd,  *pdncapada,  *pddakd, 
*padagfhya  :  (e)  *purusa,  with  *purusi,  paHruseya,  *purusa,  *purusdd, 
purusaghnd,  *apurusd,  dpiirusaghna  [the  forms  purusdta,  purusatrd, 
purusatvdta,  and  purusia  are  established  in  the  Rigveda  proper,  and 
should  either  be  derived  from  a  stem  purus-  or  treated  as  the  begin- 
nings of  the  transition]  :  (f)  *mamsd,  with  *mamsabhiksd :  (g)  mdsa  : 
(h)  hfdaya,  with  *hrdayavidh  and  *hrdayia.  For  svarajd  (conjectu- 
rally)  see  §  151  iii. 

10.  Certain  other  noun-stems,  namely  bhumi  with  dydvabhuml 
and  bhumid  ;  *sakiini,  *sakunti  and  *sakuntikd. 

11.  Forms  of  the  1st  person  singular  conjunctive  (or  imperative) 
in  -dni :  kdrani,  *gamani,  *gani,  carani,  *davisani,  *dadhdni,  *ndyani, 
*pacani,  brdvani,  *bhajdni,  *randhaydni,  *rdjani,  *va)iani,  *srjdni, 
*stosani,  *janghdndni. 

12.  Subjunctive  forms  in  -sai,  -tai  :  *yajatai. 

13.  Imperative  forms  in  -dm,  -ram,  -ratdm  :  *duhdm. 

14.  md  with  the  aorist  injunctive  middle  or  passive.  For  the 
occurrences  see  Avery,  JAOS.  xi  pp.  346,  347,  361,  and  add  md  bibhi- 
sathdh  viii  79  8b. 

15.  Precatives  in  -dsam  :  kriyasma,  *bhuyasam. 

16.  Future  forms  from  stems  in  -sya,  -isya,  not  including  the 
participles,  which  are  established  in  use  (chiefly  as  desideratives)  in 
the  Rigveda  proper :  *jesyd-,  vaksyd-  (vac),  karisyd-,  janisya-,  dhara- 
yisya-,  *bhavisya-,  manisyd-,  vasayisya-,  sanisya-,  stavisyd-.  Past  tenses 
of  this  formation  must  be  looked  upon  as  desideratives  :  such  too  are 
karisydh  i  165  9d,  iv  30  23b,  karisydsi  i  1  6b. 


38  Forms  indicating  late  date 

1 7.  Causatives  in  -p :  arpdya-,  ksepdya-,  *glapaya-,  *dhdpaya- 
(1  dhd),  dhdpdya-  (2  dhd),  *vdpdya-  (1  vd),  sthdpaya-,  sndpdya-,  dti- 
sthipa-,  *jihipa-. 

18.  Augmented  forms  of  the  imperfect  passive  :  djdya-,  aniya-, 
aprcya-,  dmucya-,  aricya-,  *dpasya-. 

19.  Absolutives  in  -tvd  (-tud):  pltvd,  bhittvd,  *bhictvd,  mitvd, 
*mohayitvd,  yuktvd,  *vrtvd,  srutvd,  *snatvd,  hatvd,  hitvti. 

20.  The  imperfect  forms  aslh,  aslt. 

21.  All  forms  from  the  following  verb-stems:  *rchd-,  *kuru-, 
*ksind-,  *grhnd-,  nudd-  (active),  brdvl-,  bibhl-,  muncd-,  mrna-,  hdr-  (hf-), 
including  with  the  last  the  noun  2.  hdr  as  '  taking.' 

22.  The  pronoun  adds,  with  its  adverbs  addh,  ainutah,  and  amuyd: 
the  form  etdd,  whether  neuter  singular  or  adverb  :  the  pronoun  ena 
(the  adverb  end  is  earlier) :  and  the  pronominal  words  ddhara,  adhamd, 
itara,  iXdac  (Hdaktdt,  udaktdh,  and  uccd  are  earlier :  for  uccaih  see 
No.  23) :  tdvat,  tirydc  and  its  derivatives,  pdrdc  (for  pardcaih  see  No.  23), 
bahu  (bahuld  is  earlier)  with  *bahu-annd,  *bahutrd,  *bahudhd,  bahupdyia, 
*bahuprajd,  *bahus4van :  yatard,  ydtama:  ydvat  with  *ydvanmdtrdm  : 
sdrva  '  all '  (but  not  sdrva  '  whole '),  with  *sarvdtah)  *sarva-anga,  *-hut, 
-hfd. 

23.  Adverbs  in  -aih,  namely  uccaih,  nicaih,  pardcaih,  pracaih, 
Sdnaih,  and  sanakaih :  in  -at,  namely  apakdt,  uttardt,  pascdt  (and  in 
dpascdddaghvan) ;  for  adhardt  see  No.  22:  in  -tah,  with  the  exception 
of  dtah,  dntitah,  abhitah,  kutah,  ydtah,  and  visvdtah:  and  also  the 
following :  dtho  (§  171),  antard  (and  antarabhard),  anydtra,  evdm, 
kathdm,  tdtra,  tdtha,  durdm,  vai,  sahd,  and  saydm :  and  f  va  when 
required  by  the  metre  in  place  of  iva  (see  below,  §  129). 


87.    D.    Words  characteristic  of  the  popular  Rigveda 

AND  THE  ATHARVAVEDA. 

1.  Names  of  the  body  and  its  parts:  dnga  'limb,'  with  *dngia, 
cdtur-,  vilu-,  *sarva-  and  su-dnga ;  asthdn  '  bone,'  with  *anasthd, 
*anasthd?i,  *asthanvdt,  and  *asthlvdt  'knee';  uru  'thigh';  cdksus  'eye,' 
with  *dghora-,  *visvdtah-,  *hrade-caksus,  and  *cdksusmat ;  pdrus  'limb'; 
*prsti  'rib,'  with  *prsti-dmayin ;  majjdn  'marrow';  mukha  'mouth,' 
with  visvdtomukha ;  sdrlra  'body,'  with  brhdccharlra ;  *srotra  'ear.' 

2.  Names  of  other  objects  of  common  life:  *aksd  'die';  aghnyd 
'ox,  cow';  anddvah  'waggon';  asvatthd  'fig-tree';  *udakd  'water,' 
with  *anudakd,  dpodaka  ;  rsabhd  'bull';  odand  'broth';  kumbhd  'jug,' 
with  *kumbhin;  *krsi  'ploughed  land,'  with  dkrslvala ;  kslrd  'milk,' 
with  kslrapdkd  :  gosthd  'stall';  grama  'village,'  with  arista-,  mahd-, 
sura-grama,  grama-jit,  *-ni,  and  *grdmid ;  caru  'pot';  jayd  'wife,'  and 
*brahmajayd;  *tfna  'grass';  *darbhd  'wisp';  *dundubhi  'drum,'  nald 
'reed,'  with  ndU;  ndri  'woman';  pdsa  'snare,'  with  *pdsadyumna, 
pasin,  and  bhuripdsa ;  pums   (pumdms)   '  man  ' ;   pfddku  '  serpent '  in 


Words  indicating  late  date  39 

pfddkusdnu;  vasd  'cow,'  with  vaJdnna  ;  6vdn  'dog,'  with  tvdpada, 
*s'vdydtuJ  and  sunesita  ;  *sarpd  'serpent';  skambtid  'post,'  with  slca/m- 
bhddesna  ;  stri  '  woman/  with  *strai?ia  ;  spJidti  '  fattening.' 

3.  Verbs  of  common  life  :  compounds  of  ad  '  eat,'  *amdd,  *urjdd, 
karambhdd,  *kravydd,  *purusdd,  *madhu-dd,  yavasdd,  *yavdd,  vitivdd, 
suhutdd,  *suyavasdd,  *somdd,  *havirdd,  havydd ;  an  'breathe,'  with 
dvyanant,  and,  prdnd,  apiprdna,  prdnana  ;  a£  'eat,'  with  *dnasna7it, 
dsna,  prdM,  prdsdvya,  and  *sdsandnasand ;  Iks  'see,'  with  iksenia ; 
khan  'dig,'  with  *khanitdr,  *khanitra,  khanitrima ;  *gup  'watch'; 
*gopdy  '  tend  ' ;  ghas  (jaks)  '  swallow,'  with  *ghdsi,  jagdhd,  *jagdhvdya  ; 
crt  '  knot,'  with  vicft  and  sarhcft ;  chid  '  break,'  with  dchidyarndna, 
dchimiapatra,  ukhdchid,  *chidrd  (but  dchidra  and  its  compounds  are 
established  earlier);  jiv  'live'  (butjlvdse  is  earlier);  dus  'pollute';  dvis 
'  hate  ';  nart  (nrt)  '  dance,'  with  nrti,  nrtu  ;  nas  '  be  lost,'  with  *dnasta- 
pasu,  -vedas,  and  manands ;  nah  'sew';  pac  'cook';  pad  'go,'  with 
*anipddyamdna  ;  bandh  'bind'  (but  baddhd  is  earlier);  ddhi  bru  'com- 
fort'; mar  (mr)  'die';  muh  '  be  bewildered  ' ;  vad  'speak';  sam  viddnd 
'  possessed  of ' ;  vyadh  '  wound,'  with  *dndviddha  and  *hrdaydm,dh ; 
sap  'curse,'  with  *sa,pdtha,  *sapathia ;  sar,  sir  'break';  sis  'remain 
over';  *sus  'be  dry';  sarp  'creep';  sumanasy  'be  kind';  hinis  'hurt,' 
with  dhimsat,  dhirhsana,  dhimsyamdna,  and  *himsrd. 

4.  Words  connected  with  disease,  magic,  and  popular  belief : 
-dfijana  'salve,'  in  abhi-,  *d-,  vi-dnjana,  and  * dnjanagandhi ;  apsards 
1  water-sprite ' ;  aranydni  '  forest-sprite  ' ;  dsura  (hostile  deity),  with 
asurahdn  and  *dsurd;  krtyd  'witchcraft';  gandharvd  (proper  name), 
with  gandharvi,  gandharvd;  jards,  jard  'age,'  with  jardyu,  jyotir- 
jarayu  ;  devajand  '  troop  of  devas '  ;  nirrti  '  destruction ' ;  pisdci  '  will 
o'  the  wisp  ' ;  brdhmand  '  by  magic ' ;  bhesajd  '  medicine,'  with  jdldsa-, 
*visvd-bhesaja ;  *mrtyu  '  death,'  with  dmrtyu  and  mrtyu-bdndhu  ; 
ydksma  'disease,'  with  ayaksmd,  *ajnatayaksmd,  *rajayaksmd ;  yamd 
(proper  name),  with  *yami  and  *yamdrajan  ;  ydtudhdna  '  wizard,'  with 
*yatudhani;  -rogd  'disease,'  in  *hrdrogd ;  visa  'drug,'  with  avisd, 
*visdvant. 

5.  Technical  terms  chiefly  of  ritual  and  philosophy :  dsat,  dsat 
'  non-existent ' ;  dsu  '  existence,'  with  *asutfp,  dsuniti,  *gatdsu  ;  ajya 
'sacrificial  butter,'  with  prsaddjyd ;  atmdn  'soul,'  with  *dtmadd,  dt- 
manvdnt,  satdtman ;  dsa  'zone';  gdrhapatya  '  householdership,'  with 
sugdrhapatyd ;  gdyatri  (the  metre) ;  *brahmacdrin  '  student,'  with 
*vratacdrin ;  cittd  'thought';  chdndas  'hymn';  -jndud  'knowledge' 
in  *sa7h-,  *suvi-jndnd ;  tdpas  'penance,'  with  tdpasvat ;  tejas  'vital 
force';  di4  and  pradis  '  region  ' ;  devdtd  '  divinity  ';  devaydna  'directed 
to  the  devas';  dhdtdr  'creator,'  with  vidhdtdr ;  papa  'sinful'  (but 
pdpatvd  'feebleness'  is  earlier);  pitdrah  'ancestors,'  with  *pitr-yajnd, 
-ydna,  and  -vittd) ;  prajdpati  (proper  name) ;  brdhmand  '  Brahmin,' 
with  brdhmaria ;  bhdvya  'future';  bhdgadheya  'portion';  bhutd  'past'; 
ydjus  'rite' ;  *rathamtard  (a  metre  ?)  ;  vdrcas  'energy ' ;  *virdj  (a  metre) ; 
visvdkarman  'first  cause';  visvdrilpa  (proper  name)  and  *vis'varupi ; 
sraddhd  'faith';  sapta-rsdyah  'seven  singers';  sabhd  'meeting,'  with 
sabhdvat,  *sabhdsdhd,  sabheya;  sukrtdm  'good  work';  *svargd  'heaven'; 
svdhd  '  amen,'  with  svdhakrta,  svdhdkrti. 


40  Words  indicating  late  date 

6.  ddhipati  t  lord,'  in  ddhipatya.     Cf.  B  103. 

7.  *dnumati  'reflection.' 

8.  dyana  '  going,'  in  *d-,  ud-,  upa-,  *nir-,  *ni-,  *para-,  *vi-,  supra-, 
supa-ayand. 

9.  dranya  '  strange,'  and  aranyd. 

10.  *dkitti  '  attention.' 

11.  isu  'arrow,'  with  isu-kft,  -dhi,  *-bala,  -mat,  *-hasta ;  *asann-, 
ksiprd-,  *tigmd-,  and  su-isH ;  and  in  *anisavyd.  The  group  isudhy, 
isudhyd,  isudhyu  is  earlier. 

12.  osadhi  'herb,'  except  in  the  form  osadhlsu.     Cf.  B  4. 

13.  *kasydpa  (proper  name). 

14.  klrti  'glor}'.'     But  suklrti  belongs  to  the  Rigveda. 

15.  *gandhd  'smell':  with  *dnjana-,  *dhumd-gandhi,  sugdndhi 
and  sugandhi. 

16.  candrdmas  '  moon.' 

17.  *tarh  'destroy,'  with  *tdrha?ia  and  dasyutdrhana. 

18.  *tlksnd  'sharp,'  with  *tlksnd6rnga. 

19.  abhi  das  'plot.' 

20.  The  phrase  *ndma(h)  astu  '  worship  be  done.' 

21.  *ndth  'need,'  and  *anathd. 

22.  pdyasvant  '  rich  in  milk.' 

23.  paridhi  'enclosure.' 

24.  *  puny  a  'fragrant/  with  *ptinyagandha. 

25.  prajd  'family.'  The  compounds  are  common  in  the  Rigveda. 
Cf.  B  36. 

26.  pratisthd  '  rule,  standard.' 

27.  bhuti  'subsistence.' 

28.  bhrdtrvya  '  clanship '  in  abhratrvyd. 

29.  raani  'jewel,'  and  manigrlvd. 

30.  *rajania  '  of  royal  blood.' 

31.  rdtrl  'night,'  with  *ati-t  *aho-  ratrd. 

32.  rastrd  '  royalty,'  with  *abhirastra. 

33.  rudh,  rundh  '  hinder.' 

34.  -vatsard  '  year  '  in  pari-,  sam-vatsard  ;  pari-,  sam-vatsarina. 

35.  vdrman  '  shield,'  with  vdrmanvat  and  varmin. 

36.  varsd  'rain,'  with  varsd-nirnij,  *varsia. 

37.  vasin  'ruler.' 

38.  vasas  '  robe ' :  one  or  two  compounds  are  earlier. 

39.  virudh  'herb.' 

40.  vrksd  '  +ree,'  with  vrksdkesa. 

41.  *svdsura  'father  in  law/  with  *svasr4. 

42.  sds  'six.' 

43.  sajatd  'related.' 


Words  indicating  late  date  41 

44.  *sapdtna  '  rival,'  with  *asapatnd,  sapatnahdn,  and  sapdtnl. 

45.  sdmiti  'meeting.' 

46.  sarh  srj  *  provide  with,'  with  *samsfj,  ^sarhsrstajit,  and  *sdrii- 
srastar. 

47.  send  '  army,'  with  dyuddha-,  *indra-,  *citrd-,  *deva-,  mahd-&gt; 
vrddhd-,  sdrva-send,  and  sendnt 

48.  stanayitnu  •  thunder.' 

49.  syond  (siond)  'soft':  and  siona-kft,  -4i. 

50.  svdpua  '  sleep,'  with  *jdgratsvapnd. 

51.  1  *hdras  'heat,'  with  *vll_uharas,  hdrasvant. 

52.  Aetf.  'lance,'  with  iigmdheti. 


APPENDIX   II. 
88.     List  of  doubtful  hymns  and  fragments. 

Mand,ala  I. 

13  9-12.  The  second  section  of  the  Apriya  hymns,  both  here  and 
elsewhere,  contains  late  linguistic  features  :  but  only  in  ix  5  *8— n 
do  we  find  either  of  the  characteristic  metres  of  the  popular  Rigveda. 

22  i6-j8.     Stanzas  17,  18  are  repeated  AY.  vii  26  4,  5. 

22  19-21.     Stanzas  19,  20  are  repeated  AV.  vii  26  6,  7. 

*24  1,  2.  These  stanzas  seem  to  have  the  character  of  a  charm  : 
much  depends  on  the  interpretation  of  the  phrase  pitdram  ca  matdram 
ca,  for  which  parallels  are  found  in  *i  163  13b,  viii  69  15d,  ix  73 
5a,  *x  88  15d,  those  in  the  popular  Rigveda  being  the  nearer.  For 
the  form  of  question  and  answer  compare  *v  44  14,  15. 

*24  6-15.  The  linguistic  indications  receive  some  confirmation 
from  slight  contamination  in  15c.  Part  of  stanza  9  is  repeated  AV. 
vi  97  2,  and  stanza  15  in  AV.  vii  83  3. 

27  13.     Uncertain:  cf.  i  139  11,     iii  9  9. 

28  1-6.  The  metre  shews  some  trace  of  epic  rhythm,  and  the 
linguistic  notes  indicate  late  date.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  difficult  to 
separate  these  stanzas  from  7-9,  which  are  similar  in  their  subject:  and 
the  whole  hymn  may  therefore  be  assigned  to  the  transition  period. 

29.  This  hymn  has  to  some  extent  the  character  of  a  charm ;  it 
can  hardly  be  earlier  than  the  transition  period,  and  like  28  1-6,  is 
possibly  later. 

32.     Stanzas  1-3  are  quoted  AV.  ii  5  5-7. 

35.  This  hymn,  if  standing  by  itself,  would  naturally  be  referred 
to  the  popular  Rigveda  in  consequence  of  its  metre  :  but  it  can  hardly 
be  separated  from  the  other  hymns  of  its  group. 

50  1-9.     Quoted  AV.  xiii  2  16-24. 

*84  16-18.  Out  of  order,  and  not  of  the  character  of  a  hymn. 
Stanza  16  quoted  AV.  xviii  1  6. 


42  Doubtful  hymns 

*89  10.     Fragment  of  a  cosmogony,  quoted  AY.  vii  6  i. 

*90  9.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza,  quoted  AY.  xix  9  6. 

*93.  The  metre  of  1-3  may  be  epic  Anustubh,  and  4-8  is  out  of 
order,  besides  shewing  contamination.  The  combination  of  Agni  and 
Soma  is  so  strange  to  the  Rigveda  proper  that  it  is  probable  that  the 
whole  hymn  is  late. 

*97.  This  appears  to  be  of  the  nature  of  a  charm  :  stanzas  1-8 
are  quoted  AY.  iv  33  1-8. 

105  1-3.     Stanza  1  quoted  AY.  xviii  4  89. 

105  16-18.     Stanza  16  shews  a  trace  of  epic  rhythm. 

115.  Stanza  1  is  quoted  AY.  xiii  2  35  :  but  the  hymn  can  hardly 
be  separated  from  the  other  hymns  of  its  group.     Compare  i  35. 

*120  10-12.  The  character  of  this  fragment  is  very  uncertain  : 
it  disturbs  the  order  of  the  hymns. 

*126  6,  7.     Appended  Anustubh  stanzas. 

*  133  1-5.  These  stanzas  have  the  character  of  a  charm  :  but  it  is 
very  unusual  to  find  such  verses  prefixed  to  one  of  the  hymns  of  the 
ordered  collection. 

139  11.     Uncertain:  cf.  i  27  13. 

*161.  A  typical  mythological  hymn,  assigned  to  the  late  Rigveda 
on  linguistic  grounds. 

♦170,  *179.     See  on  i  *161. 

188  8-11.     See  on  i  13  9-12. 

Mandala  II. 

3  8-1 1.     See  on  i  13  9-12. 

*8  6.  The  metre  may  be  interpreted  either  as  Gayatri  with  extra 
verse  or  as  epic  Anustubh,  but  the  association  of  Indra  and  Soma  with 
Agni  is  contrary  to  the  practice  of  the  Rigveda,  and  the  nearest  parallel 
is  perhaps  in  the  popular  hymn  *x  173  5c  6a. 

*32  4,  5.     Quoted  AV.  vii  48  1,  2. 

39,  40.  The  linguistic  notes  indicate  late  date,  but  this  is  un- 
confirmed, and  it  seems  better  to  assign  the  hymns  to  the  same  group 
as  i  35,  115. 

Mandala  III. 

*8  10,  11.  This  fragment  has  late  linguistic  notes,  and  disturbs 
the  order  of  the  hymns. 

9  9.     Uncertain  (compare  i  27  13),  but  required  here  by  the  order. 
*28.     Out  of  order,  and  similar  in  metre  to  the  next'  hymn.     Cf. 
also  iii  52. 

*29.  In  spite  of  the  linguistic  notes,  the  general  character  of  this 
hymn,  the  traces  of  epic  Anustubh  metre,  and  the  fact  that  stanza  10 
is  partly  repeated  in  AY.  iii  20  1,  and  stanza  16  is  repeated  AY.  vii 
97  1,  all  contribute  to  mark  it  as  belonging  to  the  popular  Rigveda. 


Doubtful  hymns  43 

33  1— 12.     Uncertain  :  cf.  iii  53  9-16. 

*33  13.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza,  repeated  AV.  xiv  2  16. 

*37  ir.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza. 

*52.  This  hymn  is  out  of  order,  and  being  closely  parallel  to  iii  28, 
is  probably  a  late  addition. 

53  1.  An  independent  hymn,  in  its  proper  order  as  one  of  the 
Indra  hymns. 

53  2-16.  A  series  of  fragments,  as  to  which  it  is  only  clear  that 
they  are  of  the  same  period  as  iii  33  1-12,  which  also  deals  with  the 
personality  of  VisVamitra.     Cf.  vi  47  1-25. 

53  24.     Appended  Tristubh  verse. 


Mand,ala  IV. 

12  6.     Uncertain  :  cf.  i  27  13,     iii  9  9.     Repeated  x  126  8. 

*13  5.     Apparently  a  fragment  of  a  cosmogony  :  cf.  i  *89  10. 

24  *9  *io.  These  verses  form  no  part  of  the  hymn  :  their  meaning 
is  much  disputed,  but  they  seem  to  have  the  character  of  the  popular 
hymns.     Cf.  i  *120  10-12. 

*39  6.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza. 

42  1-7.  A  mythological  dialogue,  which  appears  to  belong  to  the 
Rigveda  proper. 

57  1-3.  This  hymn  is  not  out  of  order,  and  by  its  analogy  with 
the  hymns  to  Brhaspati,  Sadaspati,  and  Vastospati  belongs  to  the 
Rigveda  proper. 

*58.  The  position  of  this  hymn  is  the  principal  reason  for  assign- 
ing it  to  the  popular  Rigveda  rather  than  to  the  cretic  period,  with 
which  it  is  connected  by  subject  and  language.  Stanza  10  is  repeated 
AV.  vii  82  1.  Stanza  11  may  be  regarded  as  a  contamination  of  the 
Tristubh  metre,  or  it  may  be  an  appended  stanza.     Cf.  x  *94,  *175. 


Mandala  V. 

5  8-1 1.     See  on  i  13  9-12. 

*30  15.  The  reference  to  the  Pravargya  ceremony  is  isolated  in 
the  Rigveda,  and  may  indicate  later  date. 

40  4.     Appended  Tristubh  stanza. 

*44  14,  15.     The  metre  indicates  late  date. 

46  7,  8.     Repeated  AY.  vii  49  1,  2. 

*51  14,  15.     Appended  Anustubh  stanzas. 

61  6-8.  The  language,  and  perhaps  the  subject,  may  indicate  later 
date. 

62.     The  language  indicates  late  date,  but  this  is  unsupported. 

78  4.     Appended  Tristubh  stanza. 

*83.     Verse  7a  repeated  AV.  iv  15  6a  :  stanza  8  AV.  iv  15  16. 


44  Doubtful  hymns 


Mandala  VI. 

9.     The  language  alone  indicates  late  date :  cf.  ii  39,  40,     v  62. 

15  i6-r8.  These  stanzas  appear  to  form  a  separate  hymn,  rightly 
placed  in  the  arrangement. 

*15  19.     Out  of  order,  and  late  by  the  linguistic  notes. 

*16  47,  48.     Appended  Anustubh  stanzas. 

47  1-25.  This  hymn  consists  of  a  number  of  fragments,  all  of 
which  are  out  of  order  in  the  collection,  though  they  seem  to  be 
roughly  arranged  amongst  themselves.  The  first  three  fragments  are 
really  separate  hymns,  viz.  1-5  (Soma),  6—10  (Indra),  11—14  (Indra) : 
they  shew  no  indication  of  late  date,  except  that  several  stanzas  are 
repeated  elsewhere,  namely  1  in  AV.  xviii  1  48,  6  AV.  vii  76  6,  8 
AV.  xix  15  4,  11  AV.  vii  86  i,  12-13  RV.  x  131  6,  7,  and  AV. 
vii  91  1,  92  1.  It  does  not  seem  clear  that  these  hymns  belong  to  the 
popular  Rigveda.  On  the  other  hand  stanzas  15-18  are  late  by  metre 
and  language,  but  do  not  appear  in  AV.  :  stanzas  19,  20,  21  give  no 
certain  indications,  and  stanzas  22-25  appear  rather  to  be  early  in 
character. 

*48  22.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza  :  cosmogonical. 

*51  r6.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza. 

*52  1-3.  Stanza  2  repeated  AV.  ii  12  6.  If  stanzas  1-3  are  a 
later  addition,  the  remainder  of  the  hymn  is  in  its  proper  order. 

52  4-6.     Uncertain. 

53-57.  The  Pusan  group  shews  a  large  proportion  of  the  popular 
linguistic  notes,  especially  54,  of  which  stanzas  9,  10  are  repeated 
AV.  vii  9  3,  4. 

60  14,  15.     Uncertain. 

72.     The  metre  alone  indicates  late  date. 

Mandala  VII. 

2  8— 11.  The  metre  indicates  that  these  stanzas  really  belong  to 
iii  4,  which  see. 

17.  This  hymn  is  a  play  upon  an  Apriya  hymn  of  seven  verses, 
such  as  vii  1  1—7.    Although  out  of  order,  it  does  not  appear  to  be  late. 

*33.     Mythological  poem. 

*35.  Uncertain:  stanzas  1-10  are  repeated  AV.  xix  10  1-10 ; 
stanzas  11-15  in  AV.  xix  11  1-5. 

41.      Uncertain  :  repeated  AV.  iii  16  1-7. 

*49.     Uncertain :  stanza  3  repeated  AV  i  33  2. 

55  1.     Compare  the  preceding  hymn,  and  iv  57  1-3. 

*55  2-4.     Apparently  a  charm,  but  the  metre  is  lyric :  cf.  x  126. 

59  7,  8.     Stanza  8  repeated  AV.  vii  77  2. 

59  9-1 1.     Out  of  order.      Stanza  9  repeated  AV.  vii  77  1. 

*Q6  16.     Unmetrical  and  probably  late. 


Doubtful  hymns  45 

89  5.     Repeated  AV.  vi  51  3. 

101,    102.     The   Parjanya   hymns  shew  late  linguistic   notes,  but 
they  are  in  their  order  in  the  collection. 


Mandala  VIII. 

*1  33.     Out  of  place,  and  with  late  linguistic  notes. 

*1  34.     Mythological. 

*3  24.  Appended  cosmogonical  verse.  The  metre  is  probably 
Pankti. 

*33  16-18.     Perhaps  late  :  but  cf.  v  61  6-8. 

*33  19.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza  :  mythological. 

47  1-12.     Uncertain. 

*47  13-18.  The  language  and  the  epic  rhythm  in  15c  17d  point  to 
late  date.     Stanza  17  is  repeated  AV.  vi  46  3,     xix  57  1. 

*48.     The  metre  seems  to  indicate  late  date. 

*59  1—5.  The  position  of  this  hymn  between  two  others  that  are 
clearly  late,  suggests  late  date. 

*66  15.     Appended  Anustubh  stanza. 

69.  This  hymn  contains  some  elements  of  uncertainty:  verse  11a 
shews  epic  rhythm  :  for  the  phrase  pitre  mdtre  see  on  i  24  1,  2. 

*100.  In  the  section  7-9  the  metre,  in  10-11  the  subject  plainly 
indicate  late  date.  In  the  other  sections  the  probabilities  are  on  the 
same  side. 

*101  14.     Cosmogonical  stanza,  repeated  AV.  x  8  3. 

*101  15,  16.     Probably  late,  as  following  stanza  14. 

*102  19-21.     Probably  late  :  stanza  20  is  repeated  AV.  xix  64  3. 

*102  22.     Probably  late,  as  following  stanzas  19-21. 

Mandala  X. 

2.     Stanzas  3,  4  are  repeated  AV.  xix  59  3,  2. 

9  1-5.     Repeated  AV.  i  5  1—3,  6  1,  54. 

*11-13.  Hymns  11,  12  are  repeated  in  their  entirety  in  AV. 
xviii  1,  and  hymn  13  is  repeated  in  AV.  xviii  3  39-41,  vii  57  2. 
There  are  also  other  marks  of  agreement  in  the  collection  10—14  which 
make  it  undesirable  to  separate  its  parts,  though  it  is  probable  that 
some  fragments  of  earlier  date  are  included  in  it. 

*27,  *28.  The  dialogue  form  contributes  to  make  late  date 
probable. 

*32  6-9.     Mythological  poem  (Agni  in  the  waters). 

40.     Stanzas  10,  12,  13  repeated  AV.  xiv  1  46,  2  5,  6. 

*51-53.     Mythological  poems  (Agni  and  the  gods). 

54-56  3.  Uncertain.  The  stanza  55  5  is  repeated  AV.  ix  10  9, 
and  56  1  in  AV.  xviii  3  7. 


46  Doubtful  hymns 

*59  1-4,  *60  1-6.  In  the  absence  of  more  definite  indications 
these  hymns  may  be  presumed  to  be  of  the  same  late  date  as  those 
attached  to  them. 

62.     Uncertain. 

*87  22-25.  The  position  amongst  hymns  clearly  popular  makes 
late  date  probable. 

*94.  The  date  of  this  ceremonial  hymn,  as  of  *iv  58,  *x  175,  is 
open  to  some  doubt. 

*95.     Mythological  poem  (Pururavas  and  Urvasi). 

*101,  *102.  These  hymns  must  be  considered  together,  owing  to 
the  similarity  of  position  and  metre.  Late  date  is  indicated  by  the 
repetition  of  101  3,  4  in  AV.  iii  17  2,  1,  and  by  the  mythological 
subject  of  102. 

*108.     Mythological  poem. 

110  x-ir.  Apriya  hymn,  repeated  AV.  v  12  i-u.  See  on  i  13 
9-12. 

*119.     Out  of  order.     Decisive  indications  of  date  are  wanting. 

*120.     Repeated  AV.  v  2. 

123.  Stanza  6  is  repeated  AY.  xviii  3  66. 

124.  This  hymn  as  a  whole  is  out  of  order.  Stanzas  *1 — 5 
containing  the  dialogue  between  Indra  and  Agni  appear  to  be  late. 
On  the  other  hand  the  Vrtra  myth  in  stanzas  6-8  has  the  signs  of 
early  date.  For  the  'swan'  myth  in  stanza  *9  close  analogies  are 
wanting,  but  it  is  more  probably  late. 

127.     Uncertain  :  for  the  subject  cf.  v  61  17-19. 
*139  1—3.     Uncertain  :  stanza  3  is  repeated  AV.  x  8  42. 
*139  4-6.     Mythological  poem. 
*141.     The  metre  indicates  late  date. 
*142  1-6.     Uncertain. 

*149.     Uncertain:  verse  2c  suggests  contamination. 
*153.      Uncertain  :  the  position  favours  late  date. 
*157.     Mythological  poem  (slaying  of  the  Asuras). 
*167.     The  dialogue  form  suggests  late  date. 

*168.     For  the  subject  cf.  *x  146 :  verse  2c  suggests  contamination. 
*170.     The  reference  to  the  slaying  of  the  Asuras  suggests  late 
date:  cf.  *x  157. 

*175.     See  on  *x  94. 

*179.     Repeated  AV.  vii  72. 

♦180.     Stanzas  2,  3  are  repeated  AV.  vii  84  3,  2. 

185.  The  metre  suggests  early  date  :  but  the  position  makes  this 
doubtful. 

*187.     Repeated  AV.  vi  34. 

*191  1.  Repeated  AV.  vi  63  4.  The  position  confirms  the 
presumption  of  late  date. 


CHAPTER  III. 

REARRANGEMENT   OF  THE   RIGVEDA  PROPER. 

89.  It  has  been  indicated  above  (§§  57-62)  that  large  parts 
of  the  Rigveda  proper  are  on  the  whole  metrically  homogeneous, 
and  that  these  parts  can  on  general  grounds  be  arranged  in  three 
periods.  More  precisely,  the  greater  part  of  the  Rigveda  may  be 
divided  into  ten  groups  of  hymns  as  shewn  on  the  next  page, 
six  of  the  groups  being  roughly  equivalent  to  six  of  the  Mandalas, 
and  the  remaining  four  being  of  a  more  composite  character.  Of 
these  ten  groups,  five  have  the  characteristics  of  the  bardic  period  : 
two  are  regular  in  metre,  and  therefore  to  be  assigned  to  the 
normal  period  :  two  have  the  characteristics  of  the  cretic  or 
transition  period :  and  the  last  group  comprises  the  hymns  of  the 
popular  Rigveda. 

90.  It  is  not  practicable  to  define  the  limits  of  any  of  the 
first  nine  groups  with  the  same  accuracy  with  which  the  popular 
Rigveda  has  been  defined.  It  is  nevertheless  desirable  to  revise 
the  groups  as  presented  in  the  Samhita  text,  in  order  that  at  least 
those  individual  hymns  which  are  in  most  striking  disagreement 
with  the  groups  to  which  they  belong  in  the  text  may  be  separated 
from  them,  and  also  that  these  hymns,  as  well  as  those  which 
belong  to  those  parts  of  the  Samhita  which  are  not  homogeneous, 
may  find  some  appropriate  place  in  the  grouping,  and  thus  be 
brought  under  review  in  our  examination  of  the  metre. 

We  shall  therefore  attempt  first  to  detach  from  each  group 
those  hymns  that  are  not  homogeneous  with  it,  or  at  least  those 
which  clearly  belong  to  a  different  period :  and  then  to  attach 
these  hymns,  and  those  not  yet  included  in  the  grouping,  to  those 
groups  to  which  on  the  whole  they  bear  most  resemblance.  These 
processes   cannot   of  course   alter   the  general   character  of  the 


48 


The  ten  homogeneous  groups 


respective  groups  as  already  defined  :  but  if  carried  out  with  any 
success,  they  will  greatly  help  in  removing  difficulties  which  other- 
wise might  prevent  us  from  obtaining  a  clear  view  of  the  less 
striking  characteristics  of  each  group. 


91.  Table  shewing  the  homogeneous  grouping  of 

THE  KlGVEDA. 


Group 

Period 

Hymns  included 

Family 

Distinctive  metrical  features 

I 

Bardic 

i  127-139 



Atyasti 

viii  12-18 
„    19-22 
,,    23-26 
m    27-31 
,,    43-46 
„    95-101 
„  102, 103 

Sobharl 
Vyas'va 

Sobharl 

Dimeter  Usnih 

Kakubh-Satobrhati  Pragathas 

Usnih 

Mixed  lyric  metres 

ii               i&gt; 

i&gt;               ii 
Kakubh-Satobrhati  Pragathas 

II 

») 

v  (part) 

Atri 

Anustubh   with    occasional    extra 

x  20-26 

Vimada 

verse 
Anustubh  varied 

III 

11 

i  165-190 

Mana 

Decasyllabic  Tristubh 

vi 

Bharadvaja 

&gt;i                 &gt;  • 

IV 

»» 

vii 

Vasistha 

Iambic  Tristubh 

V 

»&gt; 

i  36-43 
„  44-50 

Kanva 

»&gt; 

Brhatl-Satobrhati  Pragathas 

viii  1-5 
„     6-11 
„  32-34 
.,  49-57 

»» 
it 

Brhatl-Satobrhati  Pragathas 

VI 

Normal 

iv 

Vamadeva  ? 

Begular  Tristubh  and  Gayatri 

VII 

&gt;» 

i     1-11 
„  12-23 
„  24-29 

„  30 

Kusika  ? 

Gayatrl 
&gt;&gt; 
&gt;&gt; 
&gt;» 

iii 

Kusika 

Kegular  Tristubh  and  Gayatrl 

VIII 

Cretic 

i  94-115 

— 

Cretic  Tristubh  and  JagatI 

IX 

j&gt; 

,,  31-35 

— 

n                 ii 

x  35-84 

— 

ii                 ii 

X 

Popular 

x  14-19 
„  85-191 

— 

Contaminated  Tristubh  and  epic 
Anustubh 

ii                          &gt;i 

Indications  of  relative  date  49 

92.  The  criteria  available  in  individual  cases  have  already 
been  summarized  in  §  59,  and  must  now  be  considered  in  more 
detail.  Hymns  which  have  any  of  the  characteristics  of  the 
popular  Rigveda  must  generally  be  referred  at  earliest  to  the 
cretic  period,  and  unless  there  is  some  reason  to  the  contrary,  they 
will  be  classed  with  the  hymns  x  35-84  in  Group  IX.  Otherwise 
no  single  criteria  are  very  certain  :  in  other  words,  such  change  as 
we  observe  in  the  Rigveda  proper  is  slow  and  continuous.  On  the 
other  hand  the  concurrence  of  two  or  more  indications  in  the  same 
hymn  may  generally  be  trusted.  Generally  speaking,  stronger 
evidence  is  required  to  justify  the  detachment  of  a  hymn  that 
belongs  to  a  homogeneous  Samhita  group  than  is  sufficient  to 
guide  us  in  the  corresponding  attachment :  and  it  will  be  at  least 
prudent  to  err  on  the  side  of  caution  rather  than  unnecessarily  to 
disturb  the  existing  grouping. 

93-  The  whole  grouping  being  merely  a  provisional  aid  to  the 
study  of  the  metre,  any  full  discussion  of  the  position  of  individual 
hymns  would  be  out  of  place  here.  It  must  be  sufficient  to  state 
generally  that  there  are  numerous  small  indications  of  a  close  con- 
nexion between  particular  hymns  which  cannot  be  included  in  a 
catalogue  of  criteria.  Consequently  the  argument  in  the  remainder 
of  this  chapter  must  be  regarded  merely  as  an  outline. 

As  an  indication  of  the  value  of  the  respective  criteria,  the  instances 
in  which  their  indications  are  not  accepted  at  present  are  enclosed  in 
square  brackets  [  ].  In  the  shorter  lists  the  references  are  extended 
to  the  popular  Rigveda,  for  convenience  of  reference  later. 

94.  The  most  important  indications  of  date  are  those  furnished 
by  metre.  The  following  features  appear  to  be  characteristic  of 
the  bardic  period: — 

(i)  All  lyric  metres  (§  24) ;  Usnih,  Atyasti,  Kakubh-Satobrhati 
Pragathas,  and  mixed  lyric  metres  being  specially  characteristic  of 
Group  I,  and  Brhati- Sat  obrhati  Pragathas  of  the  Kanva  collection 
(Group  V). 

Hymns  entirely  composed  in  Brhati  seem  to  be  quite  as  common 
in  the  normal  period,  and  occasional  verses  in  Brhati  and  even  Brhati- 
Satobrhati  Pragathas  seem  to  be  found  still  later.  Such  cases  are 
iii  9  i-8,  44,  45;  vi  59  1-6  (Brhati  hymns):  iii  16  (hymn  in  B.-Sat.)  : 
i  105  8  (Brhati  with  refrain  verse),  *170  i  (B.),  *179  5  (B.) ; 
iii  *53  18  (B.);  '  vi  47  19  (B.);  *  *14  1?  (B.),  33  3-3  (B.-S.),  62  6-7 
(B.-S.),  *101  5  (B.),  *102  1,  3,  11  (B.). 

Other  instances  of  lyric  metre  outside  the  bardic  period  are 
i  *23   19  (12.8.8),  *164  42  (11.11. 8. 8),  *191   13  (8.8.12.8.8); 

4 


50  Decasyllabic  Tristubh 

iii  10  (Usnih),   21  4  (11.11.11.8),  5  (Satob.),   23  3  (Satob.),  *28  3 
(Usnih);  iv  1  1-3  (Atyasti,  etc.),  *57  5  (11 .  8 .  8) ;  vii  *55  2-4 

(8/8.8.8.4),  *66   16  (12.8.8);  x  *17  13  (11.8.8.8),  *18   11 

(12.12.8.8),  *170  4  (8.8.12.12). 

For  viii  *3  24,  ix  67  30,  *x  85  34,  see  the  '  Metrical  Commentary.' 
In  several  other  cases  in  the  late  Rigveda  the  metre  seems  to  be  con- 
fused rather  than  lyric. 

(ii)  Dimeter  verse  containing  a  varying  number  of  verses 
in  the  stanza.  This  is  particularly  common  in  Group  II  (Atri 
hymns). 

(a)  The  most  important  class  of  hymns  consists  of  the  Anustubh 
hymns  of  Mandala  v,  in  which  the  last  stanza  usually  shews  an  extra 
verse  :  hymns  9,  10,  19,  52,  and  86  shew  further  variations.  Other 
examples  are  viii  69  7-1  r,  12-16:  and  in  a  less  regular  way  *viii  91, 
*x  145,  *164,  and  other  hymns  in  connexion  with  epic  Anustubh. 

(b)  Gayatri  hymns  with  an  additional  verse  in  the  first  stanza,  or 
in  the  first  of  each  triplet  of  stanzas  are  [iii  24];  v  28  4-6,  82  1-3 ; 
viii  3  21-23,  9  19-21,  63  1-9,  68  1-12,  74  1-12,  92 ;      ix  101  1-3 ;      x  20. 

(c)  Gayatri  with  an  additional  verse  in  the  final  stanza  is  found 
i  43  7-9,  90  6-9;  vi  16  25-27,  45  31-33,  [56];  vii  94  10-12; 
viii  31  5-9,  10-14,  79;  ix  66  16-18,  67  25-27;  *x  60  1-6.  For 
•ii  8  6  see  p.  42. 

(d)  Otherwise  the  mixture  of  Gayatri  and  Anustubh  (or  Pankti) 
stanzas  seems  not  to  be  specially  characteristic  of  the  bardic  period, 
the  instances  being  i  187;  iii  53  12,  13;  iv  30;  vi  53; 
viii  2,  55,56;         x  *19,  176. 

For  the  use  of  Mahapankti  (8.8.8.8.8.8)  in  connexion  with 
Anustubh  or  Pankti  see  below,  §  95  iv. 

(iii)  Decasyllabic  Tristubh  (§  49)  variations  are  characteristic 
of  Group  III  (i  165-190,  vi)  :  they  are  found  occasionally  in  other 
groups  of  the  bardic  period.  Hymns  in  the  Dvipada  Viraj, 
Viratsthana,  and  Bhargava  metres  also  appear  to  belong  chiefly 
to  the  bardic  period. 

(a)  The  extent  to  which  decasyllabic  variations  are  admitted  in 
the  Rigveda  depends  greatly  on  the  view  taken  of  the  proposed 
restorations  indara  for  indra,  -aam  for  gen.  pi.  -dm.  The  occasions 
for  the  former  restoration  are  found  almost  exclusively  in  hymns 
which  also  shew  undoubted  decasyllabic  variations,  and  therefore  the 
restoration  seems  at  first  sight  unnecessary.  On  the  other  hand  the 
restoration  -aam  is  suggested  in  different  parts  of  the  verse,  and  in 
numerous  hymns  in  which  all  other  verses  have  the  normal  number  of 
syllables  :  and  this  restoration  therefore  seems  to  correspond  to  the 
intention  of  the  bards  generally.  If  we  admit  the  restoration  -aam, 
but  not  indara,  we  find  that  the  following  Tristubh  or  Jagati  hymns 
have  at  least  two  decasyllabic  variations,  being  at  least  one  in  every 


Iambic  hymns  51 

ten  verses:  i  60,  61,  63,  77,  104,  [145"|,  148,  153,  167,  169,  173,  174, 
178;  ii  4,  19,  20;  [iv  21];  v  33  ,-7,  41,  51  11-13  ;  vi  20, 
21,  24,  30,  33,  35,  63,  66,  68  i-8;  x  23,  49,  50,  99,  148.  Also  the 
following  lyric  hymns:  i  120  1-9,  127,  129,  135;  x  22,  93,  105, 
132  ;  and  i  149,  in  which  the  stanza  consists  of  three  Tristubh  verses. 

In  the  long  hymns  i  122,  v  45,  x  61  the  proportion  of  decasyllabic 
variations  is  slightly  less  than  as  above. 

(b)  Hymns  in  Dvipada  Virdj  are  [i  65-70],  vi  44  7-9,  vii  34  1-2 1, 
56  i-ii,  ix  109.  [The  hymn  iv  10  is  of  a  cognate  type  (5.5.5.11  .).] 
The  hymns  x  1,  6,  [46]  are  partly  in  this  metre,  partly  in  Tristubh. 
The  metre  seems  most  characteristic  of  Group  IV  (Mandala  vii);  but 
several  hymns  stand  in  the  text  in  association  with  hymns  in  normal 
Tristubh,  and  are  therefore  probably  later. 

(c)  The  only  hymn  in  Viratsthana  metre  is  ii  11,  in  which  almost 
half  the  verses  are  Tristubh.  This  hymn  will  naturally  be  associated 
with  those  in  Mandala  ii  already  noticed  as  having  decasyllabic 
variations.     Hymn  i  61  is  nearly  allied  to  this  type. 

(d)  The  Bhargava  hymns  x  77,  78  (§  52)  most  resemble  ii  11  in 
their  general  character,  about  half  the  verses  in  each  hymn  being 
Tristubh  or  Jagati. 

(iv)  Hymns  in  metres  which  contain  more  or  less  than  four 
trimeter  verses  in  the  stanza  are  most  common  in  the  Vasistha  group. 
Occasional  extra  verses  are  most  common  in  the  Bharadvaja  group. 

Hymns  composed  in  stanzas  each  of  which  contains  two  or  three 
trimeter  verses  are  i  149;  [iii  25];  vii  1  1-20,  17,  22,  31  10-12,  68; 
viii  9  10-12;  ix  110  4-6,  7-9,  10-12;         [*x  157]. 

Occasional  extra  verses  are  found  in  [*ii  43 ;  iv  17,  27] ;  v  2,  41, 
42  1-17,  43;  vi  2,  10,  15  4-6,  i3-I5,  17,  31,  49,  63;  "  [*vii  50]; 
x  115  6-9.  In  vi  15  1-3  a  dimeter  verse  is  appended  to  a  Jagati 
stanza. 

(v)  In  trimeter  verse  iambic  variations  (§  46)  are  character- 
istic of  the  bardic  period,  and  in  particular  of  the  Vasistha  group. 

The  principal  iambic  variations  are  the  rhythms    y  y  —  v ,  ^  h  —  ^ 

at  the  break,  but  we  also  include  the  rhythms   n ^,  —  u  —  w,  which 

are  generally  found  in  the  same  hymns.  The  occurrences  of  these 
rhythms  are  to  a  large  extent  found  in  the  hymns  already  marked  out 
as  belonging  to  the  bardic  period  by  the  features  noticed  under  (i),  (iii), 
and  (iv)  above. 

Thus  the  following  hymns  in  classes  already  noted  have  each  at 
least  two  iambic  variations,  being  one  in  every  eight  verses  :  i  36,  40, 
77,  79  4-6,  88,  92  i3-t5,  120  1-9,  122,  127,  128,  131,  133  6-7,  135  4-6, 
149,153,167,169,173;  ii  11,  19,  20;  [iii  25  ;  iv  10,  27;] 
v  24,  41,  53,  87;  vi  2  11,  10,  15  1-3,  13-15,  31,  35,  46,  48,  63,  66, 
68  1-8;  vii  1  1-20,  14,  17,  22,  31  10-12,  68,  81;  viii  4,  18  1-22,  19, 
20,  21,  22  7-12,  23,  25,  26  1-15,  29,  33  i-I5,  35  1-21,  36,  46,  60,  70 
7-12,  87,  90,  97  11-15,  98  7-12,  99,  103;  ix  108,  110  7-9;  x  6,  23, 
50,  61,  [62  5-10],  77,  93,  99,  105,  115  6-9,  132,  140,  144,  172.    A  very 

4—2 


52  Dimeter  verse 

large  proportion  of  these  hymns  are  in  lyric  metre,  which  suggests  that 
the  rhythm  may  be  due  to  the  influence  of  dimeter  verse. 

Hymns  in  Tristubh  (rarely  in  Jagati)  metre  shewing  this  rhythm 
to  the  same  extent  are  i  55,  56,  57,  [59,  83],  85,  87,  91  i-4,  92  9-12, 
[117],  155  1-3,  156,  158  1-5,   180,   181,   184,   190;  [ii  9,   11    31, 

17,   26,  31,   33;  iii   14,   15,   19,   26  4-6,  35,  51  4-6,  58,  61; 

iv    4,    6,    12   6,    29,    37    1-4 ;  v    8,    31,    46    1-2,    7-8,    49, 

77];  vi   4,    11,    12,   13,   15    10-12,   16  46,   23,  26,  29,   37,   38, 

40,  44  10-12,  13-15,  50,  60  1-3,  73;  vii  1  21-25,  3,  4,  7,  8,  19,  20, 
21,  23,  24,  26,  27,  30,  34  22-25,  36,  37,  38,  39,  40,  42,  43,  56  12-2;, 
57,  58,  60,  61,  62,  64,  65,  67,  70,  72,  73,  77,  84,  85,  86,  87,  88,  92, 
95,  97  ;  ix  70,  76,  79,  [85  9-12,  86  4-6,  34-36],  88,  93,  94,  [96  17-20, 
97  .9-21,  52-54] ;         x  [4,  32  i-5l  39  14],  48,  73,  74,  [76,  79],  115  r-5. 

To  the  above  are  to  be  added  several  hymns  in  which  this  rhythm 
is  found  side  by  side  with  other  features  which  indicate  late  date,  with 
which  we  include  all  hymns  in  the  popular  Rigveda :  *i  93  4-8, 
111  (§  111  i),  116  (§  95  ii,  110  iv),  *133  1-5 ;  iii  21,  22  1-3,  53  9-it, 
and  57  (§  95  i,  ii) ;  v  28  1-3,  36  1-5  (§  95  i) ;  vi  64  (§  95  ii) : 
*viii  100  1-6;  x  *59  1-7,  62  1-4  (§§  95  i,  98  viii),  65  (§  95  ii),  *95, 
*120,  *123. 

It  appears  therefore  that  iambic  rhythm  is  very  much  commoner  in 
the  bardic  period  than  elsewhere  :  but  it  is  not  rare  in  Mandala  iii 
(see  §  110),  is  sometimes  accompanied  by  indications  of  later  date,  and 
occasionally  found  even  in  the  popular  Rigveda.  Its  use  therefore 
extends  considerably  beyond  the  groups  I-V,  and  the  appearance  of 
this  feature  in  an  individual  hymn  affords  by  itself  only  a  slight 
presumption  of  date. 

(vi)     Anustubh  and  Gayatri  verse  are  most  commonly  found 

in  association  with  the  lyric  metres :  but  both  are  fairly  frequent 

in  the  groups  belonging  to  the  normal  period.     The  changes  in 

rhythm  are  on  the  whole  too  slight  to  be  used  here  as  a  criterion. 

Catalectic  and  heptasyllabic  verses  (elsewhere  than  in  the  semi- 
cadence  of  epic  Anustubh)  indicate  early  date  :  the  only  hymns  which 
shew  at  least  two  occurrences,  being  one  in  every  ten  verses,  are  viii  68 
14-19,  x  26,  and  the  following  which  are  wholly  or  partly  in  lyric 
metres:   i  120  1-9,  175  1-5,  x  22,   105. 

(vii)     The  iambic  re-opening  (opening  of  padas  b  and  d,  see 

§  41)  in  Anustubh  verse,  if  regular,  indicates  the  bardic  period. 

This  rhythm  is  regular  in  the  Anustubh  hymns  of  Mandala  v:  in 
addition  the  following  hymns  have  each  at  least  two  such  re-openings, 
being  one  in  every  four :  [i  10,  28  1-6],  84  1-3,  4-6,  176  1-5,  187  1-7; 
ii  5  ;  [iii  13];  vl9;  vi  2  1-10,  14,  44  1-3,  [*51  16]  ;  *  viii  9  1-9, 
16-18, 19-21,  95 ;      ix  98,  99,  100,  101  7-16 ;     x  21,  26,  [*58,  *87  22-25]. 

(viii)  Trochaic  Gayatri  appears  most  commonly  in  the  bardic 
period. 

Hymns  and  fragments  mainly  composed  in  Trochaic  Gayatri  are 


Contamination  53 

i  2  7-9,  3  4-6,  27  i-6,  10-12,  30  i3-i5i  41  7-9,  43  7-9,  90  1-5;  ii  6; 
v  68,  70,  82  7-9 ;  vi  16  25-27,  61  10-12  j  viii  2,  16,  71  1-9,  79,  81  ; 
ix  62  4-6,  66  16-18,  19-21 ;       x  20,  185. 

Occasional  Trochaic  stanzas  are  found  in  the  following  hymns : 
i  2  1-3,  [22  9-12],  30  7-12,  38;  [iii  11,  41;  iv  55  8-10] ;  v  19; 
vii  [89] ;       viii  3  21-23,  5,  7,  11,  55,  56,  94. 

In  connexion  with  other  metres  trochaic  dimeter  cadence  is  very- 
rare  :  but  we  find  Trochaic  Brhatt  in  iii  16,  a  trochaic  Anustubh  stanza 
in  viii  95  7,  and  trochaic  rhythm  in  uneven  lyric  metre  in  i  120  1-9. 

95.  In  striking  contrast  to  the  variety  of  metrical  form  which 
characterizes  the  bardic  period  are  the  few  and  slight  indications 
which  specially  mark  the  cretic  period,  but  are  also  not  uncommon 
in  the  normal  period  and  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

(i)     Contamination  in  Tristubh  and  Jagati  verse. 

External  contamination,  including  the  combination  of  Tristubh  or 
Jagati  stanzas  with  Gayatrl  or  Anustubh,  seems  seldom  to  be  much 
earlier  than  the  cretic  period.  It  is  however  difficult  to  define,  as  in 
some  cases  we  may  be  dealing  with  composite  hymns.  The  appearance 
of  one  or  two  Tristubh  stanzas  towards  the  end  of  Jagati  hymns  is  not 
included.  Probable  examples  are  i  35,  125 ;  ii  3  1-7  ;  iii  8  1-9.  22, 
53  9-ri,  15-16 ;  iv  7,  40  1-4,  57  1-3 ;  v  28  1-3,  [36  1-5],  60 ;  vi  7, 
[47  22-25],  58;  vii  41,  44;  x  44,  69,  124  6-8,  131;  besides  numerous 
examples  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

Internal  contamination  of  Jagati  stanzas  by  Tristubh  verses  is 
found  in  at  least  two  instances  in  each  of  the  following  hymns  :  i  110, 
114;  x  [23],  62  i-4,  n,  63,  66,  75,  [115  1-5],  122.  Similarly  of 
Tristubh  stanzas  by  Jagati  or  hybrid  verses:  i  35,  [180]  ;  vi  47  15-18, 
72  ;  ix  85  9-12.  Both  variations  are  common  in  the  popular 
Rigveda. 

(ii)     Cretic  variations,  i.e.  occurrences  of  the  rhythm  -  ^  -  after 

an  early  caesura  (§  46),  are  not  rare  in  any  part  of  the  Rigveda :  but 

they  are  proportionately  much  more  common  in  the  cretic  period. 

Hymns  of  any  length  in  which  this  rhythm  is  frequent  probably 

belong  to  the   cretic  period,  unless  indeed  they  belong  to  the 

popular  Rigveda :  but  in  short  hymns  the  same  relative  frequency 

may  be  accidental. 

Hymns  which  shew  at  least  two  cretic  variations,  being  one  in  every 
five  verses,  are  found  as  follows :  i  *24  1-2,  30  16,  51,  *84  16-18,  [91 
22-23],  *93  12,  94,  96,  100  1-15,  103,  106,  109,  112  24-25,  113,  118, 
125,  140,  146  i-4,  159,  160,  *162,  182;  ii  3  8-n,  30  i-jo,  39, 
*42 ;  iii  5,  6,  9  9,  17,  20,  36,  39,  49,  *52  5-8,  53  2-6,  54 ;  iv  11, 
34,  50  1-6,  io-ii,  *58  1-10;  v  4,  34  9,  46  3-6,  60  7-8,  76,  78  4,  80; 
vi  6,  *15  19,  [22,  27  8,  32],  47  20,  52  4-6,  [61  1-3],  70,  *74;  vii  5,  9, 
10,  13,  18  1-21,  54,  59  7-8,  [69],  78,  79,  80,  101,  *104  1-7,  *8-i7; 


54  Cretic  variations 

viii  40  12,  *58;  ix  80,  90,  97  1-3,  34-36,  37~39&gt;  40-42,  43-45,  49~5*  ; 
x  5,  8  7-9,  30,  36  1-12,  13-14,  37  1-10,  38,  44  4-9,  47,  *52  1-5,  *6, 
*53,  54,  65,  70  1-7,  *87  1-21,  106,  *107,  111,  112,  *164,  *169,  178, 
*179  2-3. 

The  following  hymns  have  both  iambic  and  cretic  variations  to  the 
extent  indicated  above:  i  *93  4-8,  111,  116;  iii  22  1-3,  57;  vi 
64. 

In  lyric  or  decasyllabic  hymns  cretic  variations  occur  only  as 
follows,  several  of  the  hymns  having  also  iambic  variations  :  i  48, 
134;   iii  21,  23;   viii  10;   ix  110  4-6;    x  78,   105,   140. 

Although  a  few  of  the  hymns,  as  indicated  by  the  brackets, 
probably  belong  to  the  bardic  period,  the  following  table  shews 
in  a  striking  way  the  extent  to  which  the  iambic  variations  are 
associated  with  the  lyric  and  decasyllabic  metres1,  and  the  rarity  of 
cretic  rhythm  in  them  :  whilst  on  the  other  hand  in  the  popular 
Rigveda  iambic  variations  almost  disappear. 


Metres 

Iambic  hymns 

Cretic  hymns 

Lyric  and  decasyllabic  metres1 
Others  in  Rigveda  proper 
Popular  Rigveda 

85 

133 

6 

9 
91 
21 

(iii)  In  the  Gayatrl  and  Anustubh  metres  the  absence  of 
those  variations  which  characterize  the  bardic  period  is  to  some 
extent  an  indication  of  later  date.  For  this  reason  it  seems  likely 
that  the  great  body  of  Gayatrl  verse  extending  from  ix  1  to  ix  67 
is  not  earlier  than  the  normal  period,  though  it  probably  includes 
some  material  of  an  earlier  date.  In  Anustubh  metre  the  absence 
of  iambic  openings  in  the  second  and  fourth  verses,  combined  with 
irregularities  of  cadence  restricted  to  the  first  and  third  verses, 
marks  an  approximation  to  the  rhythm  of  the  popular  Rigveda. 
But  there  are  very  few  single  hymns  of  sufficient  length  to  enable 
these  tendencies  to  be  confidently  traced  in  them. 

Iambic  re-openings  are  rare  in  the  following  hymns  :  i  45,  49,  105 
1-3,  9-12,  142  1-8;  iii  8  1-9,  21 ;  iv  7  2-6,  37  5-8,  47  :  vi  59  7-10; 
viii  8,  62  1-3,  89  5-7 ;        ix  101  4-6. 

Irregularities  in  semicadence  only  are  found  as  follows  :  i  28  la  2a, 
105  4a  5a  5c  15a  16a  17a,  142  2a  7a,  158  6a,  187  5a;  iii  8  3c; 
iv  37  6a  6c;  v  19  3c;  vi  2  2a,  44  4a,  47  23a;  viii  8  20a  21a 
21c,  9  9a,  34  la,  69  11a;         ix  101  6a  12c  16a;         x  62  5a  5c. 

1  Including  the  metres  referred  to  in  §  94  iv. 


Subject-matter  of  the  hymns  55 

The  combination  of  the  two  features  is  therefore  found  in  i  105, 
142  1-8  J  iii  8  1-9 ;  iv  37  5-8  j  [viii  8  ;  ix  101  4-6].  Thus 
a  tendency  in  the  direction  of  the  later  rhythm  can  perhaps  be  observed, 
not  only  in  hymns  of  the  normal  and  cretic  periods,  but  even  in  some 
of  still  earlier  date.     See  further  in  Ch.  vn. 

(iv)  Hymns  in  Mahapahkti  belong  to  the  normal  or  cretic 
period. 

For  this  the  presumption  is  only  slight.  The  hymns  that  shew  this 
metre  are  *i  191  10-12,  viii  39,  40  i-n,  41,  47  1-12,  *i3~i8,  x  *59  8-10, 
133  1-6,  134  1-6,  *166  5.  In  x  *59  8-10,  133  1-6  the  number  of  verses 
in  the  stanza  varies. 

The  extreme  regularity  of  the  metre  distinguishes  these  hymns 
from  the  Anustubh  hymns  of  Mandala  v,  in  which  also  as  many  as 
six  verses  are  found,  though  rarely,  in  one  stanza  :  and  it  deserves 
notice  that  nearly  half  of  the  hymns  are  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

96.  The  larger  collections  of  the  Rigveda  shew  a  general 
uniformity  in  their  subject-matter,  consisting  usually  of  three 
parts  about  equal  in  bulk,  of  which  one  is  composed  of  hymns  to 
Agni,  the  second  of  hymns  to  Indra,  and  the  third  of  hymns  to 
other  deities. 

On  the  other  hand  the  smaller  collections  present  us  with  a 
different  picture.  In  most  of  these  collections  (such  as  those  of 
which  Group  I  is  composed)  the  hymns  to  Indra  greatly  pre- 
dominate :  in  some,  as  in  i  65-73,  140-164,  and  the  Anustubh 
hymns  of  Mandala  v  the  hymns  to  Agni  are  most  numerous. 

It  is  therefore  probable  that  the  earliest  collections  were  often 
devoted  to  the  honour  of  one  or  two  favourite  deities,  and  that  the 
uniformity  of  the  large  collections  has  been  reached  by  a  process  of 
supplementing.  This  process  is  most  easily  to  be  traced  in  the 
Agni  hymns,  which  are  so  slightly  represented  in  most  of  the 
smaller  collections  :  thus  the  Apriya  hymns,  as  well  as  the  hymns 
to  Agni  Vaisvdnara  and  Agni  Jatavedas,  all  of  which  are  included 
in  the  Agni  sections,  appear  to  be  unknown  to  the  earliest  groups, 
and  in  consequence  no  hymns  of  any  of  these  types  are  found  in 
any  lyric  metre. 

The  instances  in  which  the  subject-matter  seems  to  afford  a 
clue  to  the  position  of  individual  hymns  are  given  in  the  next  two 
sections :  but  these  indications  are  on  the  whole  less  trustworthy 
than  those  of  metre. 

97.  The  deities  which  appear  chiefly  in  the  collections  of  the 


56  Subject-matter  of  the  hymns 

bardic  period  are  Mitra-Varuna  (and  Mitra-Varuna-Aryaman), 
Vayu  (and  Indra-Vayu),  Visnu  and  SarasvatI:  and  in  the  same 
period  we  find  almost  all  of  the  songs  of  thanks  to  patrons  for 
their  munificence  (ddnastutayah).  These  features  are  unevenly 
distributed  amongst  the  different  collections  of  the  period. 

(i)  Hymns  to  Mitra-  Varuna  are  found  i  2  7-9,  [23  4-6],  41  1-6, 
7_9)  90  t-5,  136,  137,  151-153;  ii  41  4-6;  [iii  62  16-18];  v  [62, 
63],  64-68,  [69],  70-72 ;  vi  62  8-9,  67;  vii  60-66 ;  viii  19  34-35, 
25  1-9,  [47  1-12],  101  1-6;       x  126  1-7,  132,  185. 

(ii)  Hymns  to  Vayu  and  Indra-Vayu  occur  i  2  1-3,  4-6,  [23  1—3], 
134,  135  ;  ii  41  1-3  ;  [iv  46-48] ;  v  51  1-4,  5-7  ;  vii  90-92  ; 
viii  26  20-25,  46  25-28,  101  9-10. 

(iii)  Hymns  to  Visnu  are  [i  22  16-18,  19-21],  154-156;  vi  69; 
vii  99,  100. 

(iv)  Hymns  to  SarasvatI  are  i  3  10-12;  ii  41  16-18;  vi  61; 
vii  95,  96. 

(v)  The  ddnastutayah  are  [iii  53  7;  iv  15  7-10,  32  22-24]  j  v  27 
1-3,  4-6;  30  12-14,  33  8-10,  36  6,  52  15-17,  61  5-10;  vi  27  7-8,  45 
3i-33)  47  22-25,  63  9-1 1  ;  vii  18  22-25  ;  viii  1  3°-3^  2  40-42,  3  21-23, 
4  19-21,  5  37-39,  6  46-48,  19  36-37,  21  17-18,  24  28-30,  25  22-24,  34  16-18, 
46  21—24,  29-33,  55,  56,  65  10-12,  68  14-19,  69  17-18,  70  13-15,  74  13-15; 
ix  58.  A  mock  danastuti  seems  to  be  found  in  *i  120  10-12.  (See 
R.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien  i  1  seq.) 

98.  The  deities  Brhaspati,  Vastospati,  Ksetrapati  and  Sadasas- 
pati,  and  Dadhikra  appear  to  be  most  prominent  in  the  normal 
period :  whilst  hymns  to  Agni  VaisVanara  and  Jatavedas,  Dyava- 
Prthivl,  Surya,  Parjanya,  and  the  Apah,  as  well  as  the  Apriya 
hymns  and  most  of  those  which  have  a  ritual  character,  are  found 
chiefly  in  the  cretic  period  and  the  popular  Rigveda.  Here  too 
belong  a  few  hymns  praising  liberality  (daksind),  and  easily  dis- 
tinguished from  the  earlier  ddnastutayah. 

(i)  Hymns  to  Brhaspati  or  Brahmanaspati :  i  18  1—5,  [40  1-6, 
190] ;  ii  23-26  ;  iii  62  4-6 ;  iv  49,  50  1-6,  10-11  ;  vi  73  ;  [vii  97, 
98] ;  x  *42  n,  67,  68,  *182.  To  Vastospati :  vii  54,  55  1  ;  [viii  17 
14,  15].     To  Ksetrapati :  iv  57  1-3.     To  Sadasaspati  :  i  18  6-9. 

(ii)     Hymns  to  Dadhikra  :  iv  38-40,  vii  44. 

(iii)     Hymns  to  Agni  Vaisvanara  :    i  59,  98;  iii  2,  3,  26  1-3; 

iv  5  ;  vi  7-9  ;  vii  5,  6,  13.  To  Agni  Jatavedas  :  i  99  ;  iii  17  ; 
v4;       x  188. 

(iv)  Hymns  to  Dydva- Prthivi :  i  22  13-1 5,  105  (refrain),  159,  160, 
[185] ;       ii  32  1  -3  ;       iv  56  ;       vi  70  ;       vii  53. 

(v)  Hymns  to  Surya:  i  50  1-9,  115;  iv  13  1-4;  *vii  66  16; 
[viii  101  n-12];       x  37  1-10,  *189. 

(vi)     Hymns  to  Parjanya:  *v  83;       vi  52  16;       vii  101,  102. 


Authors  and  refrains  57 

(vii)  Hymns  to  the  Apah  :  i  *23  16-18,  *ig-2i ;  vii  47,  *49 ; 
x  9  1-5,  *17  10,  30. 

(viii)  Apriya  hymns:  i  13,  142,  188;  ii  3 ;  iii  4;  v  5;  vii  2; 
ix  5  1-7,  *8-n  ;  x  70,  110.  Other  ritual  hymns  appear  to  be  i  28, 
105  4-6,  9-12,  *162,  *163,  [187];  iii  8  1-9,  *io-n,  *29 ;  iv  23  8-10, 
40  5,  *58  1-10;       viii  *66  15,  [72] ;       x  62  i-4,  76,  *94,  *101,  *175. 

(ix)  Praise  of  liberality  :  i  125,  126  1-5  ;  [vi  27  8]  ;  x  *42  9, 
62  5-10,  11,  *107,  *117  1-7. 

99.  It  has  already  been  noticed  (§  59)  that  the  mention  of 
the  family  name  of  the  poet  is  characteristic  of  the  bardic  period 
only.  The  subject  has  been  discussed  by  H.  Oldenberg,  in  an 
article  Ueber  die  Liedverfasser  des  Rigveda  (ZDMG.  xlii  199-247) : 
and  he  has  shewn  that  as  a  rule  the  singular  and  plural  forms,  e.g. 
Vasisthah  and  Vasisthasah,  are  used  side  by  side,  and  therefore  both 
alike  usually  indicate  the  name  of  a  family,  not  of  an  individual 
poet.  The  interpretation  of  the  occurrences  in  the  Rigveda  is  not 
always  easy  :  several  hymns  contain  references  to  more  than  one 
family,  and  the  later  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  frequently  refer  to  the 
ancient  poets  (or  supposed  poets)  by  name,  whilst  in  many  cases 
we  cannot  be  sure  whether  we  have  a  contemporary  record  or  a 
mythological  reference. 

The  use  of  family  names  is  dealt  with  in  detail  below  (§§  104 — 110) 
in  connexion  with  the  separate  groups :  but  the  treatment  makes  no 
claim  to  be  complete.  In  some  collections,  as  for  instances  those  of  the 
Kanvas,  the  evidence  of  family  authorship  is  very  complete,  and  the 
name  occurs  in  almost  every  hymn :  in  others,  as  for  instance  in 
Mandala  iv.,  the  evidence  is  so  slight  that  the  use  of  the  family  name 
to  describe  the  collection  can  only  be  regarded  as  conventional.  To 
the  traditional  lists  of  authors  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  any 
independent  historical  value. 

100.  Refrain  verses  concluding  each  of  a  series  of  hymns 
occur  in  Dimeter  and  in  Tristubh  metre,  but  the  latter  occasion- 
ally close  Jagati  stanzas.  They  are  chiefly  found  in  the  bardic 
period,  but  their  use  occasionally  extends  to  later  hymns.  A 
refrain  distich  is  found  in  the  cretic  collection  i  94-115. 

The    refrain    verses    regularly    used    in    the    Rigveda    are    prdtdr 

maksu  i  58-64,  viii  80  10,  ix  93  :  [tad  no  mitrdh  i  94-115, 

ix  97  57-58]:  vidy&amp;mesdm  i  165-190:  [brhdd  vadema  ii,  ix 

86   47-48]:    mddema  satdhimah   vi :    td  tarema   vi :    yuy&amp;m 

pdtd vii;  [ix  90,  97  1—3,  4-6;   x  65,  66,  122].     In  Dimeter  metre: 

utaidhi  prtsu  no  vrdhe  v;  vi  vo  made . . .vivaksase  x  20-26  ;  [ndbhantam 
any ake  same  viii  39-42,  cf.  x  133]. 

The  following  are  used  in  a  few  hymns  only  :  suviraso  viddtham  d 


58  Linguistic  indications 

vadema  i  117  25,  ii  12  15,  *viii  48  14:  vaydm  sidma  pdtayo  raylndm 
iv  50  6,  v  55  10,  viii  40  12,  *48  13,  *x  121  10:  suviriasya  pdtayah 
sidma  iv  51  10,  vi  47  12,  ix  89  7,  95  5,  x  131  6  :  rdyd  madema  brhata 
tuotdh  vi  19  13,  cf.  49  13  :  rdksd  (trdsvd)  utd  nas  tantlo  dprayucchan 
x  4,  7  (cf.  i  143  8,  iii  5  6,  20  2):  devoir  dydvdprthivl  pravatam  nah 
i  31  8,  x  67  12:  isam  urjam  suksitim  visvam  tibhdh  x  20  10,  99  12.  Of 
these  only  two  belong  to  the  bardic  Rigveda.  The  refrain  verse 
indrdyendo  pari  sravd  in  *ix  112-114  is  an  artificial  addition,  borrowed 
from  ix  106  4b. 

Concluding  stanzas  common  to  two  or  more  hymns  are  found  in 
many  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  and  usually  indicate  a  close  resemblance 
between  the  hymns  thus  connected. 

101.  Many  hymns  even  in  the  Rigveda  proper  are  out  of 
their  strict  order :  such  hymns  are  often  foreign  to  the  collections 
in  which  they  stand,  but  are  not  necessarily  of  late  date. 

For  the  discussion  of  the  order  of  the  hymns  reference  has 
already  been  made  to  H.  Oldenberg's  Prolegomena,  ch.  II. 

In  numerous  cases  there  is  a  slight  displacement  amongst  hymns 
which  are  obviously  cognate:  but  the  following  cases  seem  to  be  of 
more  importance:  i  2,  3,  10,  24  3-5,  27  13,  104,  189;  ii  9,  10, 
41  10-12;  iii  53  2-16;  iv  15  7—10,  48  5 ;  v  61  5-10,  84,  87  ; 
vi  47  1-25;  vii  17,  44-55,  59  9-1 1  ;  viii  1;  in  addition  to 
numerous  hymns  belonging  to  the  popular  Rigveda. 

102.  The  recurrence  of  more  than  a  single  stanza  of  a  hymn, 
or  of  an  independent  stanza,  in  the  Atharvaveda,  most  commonly 
indicates  the  cretic  period  at  the  earliest. 

Most  hymns  of  this  kind  have  been  already  assigned  to  the  popular 
Rigveda.  Those  that  remain  are  i  22  16—18,  19-21,  32,  50  1-9,  [154]; 
iv  2  ;  v  46  7-8  ;  vi  47  6-10,  u-14,  54,  68  9-1 1  ;  vii  [32],  41  ;  [viii 
24];        x  2,  9  1-5,  40,  110. 

103.  In  the  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  proper  the  linguistic  forms 
recorded  in  §§  84,  85  greatly  preponderate  over  those  recorded  in 
§§  86,  87  :  but  in  those  of  the  cretic  period  the  later  linguistic 
forms  constitute  a  tangible  proportion  of  the  whole.  Conversely, 
if  in  any  hymn  the  number  of  late  linguistic  forms  approaches  the 
number  of  early  forms,  there  is  a  presumption  that  the  hymn 
belongs  to  the  cretic  period. 

Such  hymns  are  i  13  9-12,  22  13-15,  23  13-15,  28  1-6,  29,  [41  7-9, 
43  4-6],  83,  84  13-15,  [135  7-9,  136  1-6],  145,  182,  188;  ii  12,  13,  28, 
39,  40,  41  10-12 ;  iii  21,  33  1-1*,  45,  53  2-6,  55  ;  iv  12  6,  42  8-10 ; 
v  5,  47  1-6,  62,  81 ;  vi  9,  [16  16-18],  47  19-21,  52  4-6,  54,  59  1-6, 
[60  14] ;  vii  46,  59  7-8,  [76],  101,  102  ;  [viii  17  11-13,  34  refrain, 
41,  55,  69  12-14,  77];         ix  85  1-4,  86  28-30,  97  7-9;        x  2,  91,  106. 


The  short  collections  59 

110  8-1 1,  126  8,  127  ;  besides  numerous  hymns  in  the  groups  i  31-35 
94-115,  x  35-84. 

104.  We  proceed  to  revise  the  grouping  of  the  hymns,  with 
such  assistance  as  is  given  by  the  indications  noted  in  §§  93-103. 

I.  The  short  collections  of  Mandala  viii,  arranged  without 
preference  for  the  Agni  hymns,  and  composed  in  metres  almost 
entirely  unknown  in  the  time  of  the  popular  Rigveda,  not  only 
bear  the  most  evident  indications  of  early  date,  but  have  been 
least  disturbed  by  later  additions.  On  account  of  their  small  bulk 
they  are  included  in  one  group.  All  the  collections  in  bk.  viii 
which  have  no  special  affinities  to  other  groups  are  here  included, 
and  also  the  collection  i  127-139,  which  has  Atyasti  as  its  dis- 
tinctive metre. 

Group  I.     The  collections  included  are  : — 

(i)  viii  12-18.  Hymns  chiefly  to  Indra,  and  mostly  in  Usnih 
metre,  either  Dimeter  or  Trimeter.  Attach  ix  102-106,  in  similar 
metres. 

(ii)  viii  19-22.  The  distinctive  metre  is  Kakubh-Satobrhati ;  the 
author's  name  Sobharl  occurs  19  2c  32a,  20  2d  8a  19b,  22  2c  15c. 
Attach  viii  102  1-18,  103  (st.  8-13  Kak.-Sat.,  8c  Upastuta,  14c 
Sobharl);  ix  108  (Kak.-Sat.);  x  115  (8b  9b  Upastuta,  connecting 
this  hymn  with  viii  103  :  see  also  §  94  iv,  v). 

(iii)  viii  23—26.  The  distinctive  metre  is  Usnih.  Vyasva  is 
named  as  author  in  23  16a  23b,  24  22a  23b  28c  29b,  26  9b  11a. 

(iv)  viii  27-31,  in  lyric  metres  and  Gayatri,  addressed  to  the 
Adityah  and  Visve  Devah. 

(v)  viii  43-46,  in  similar  metres  to  Agni,  Indra,  and  Vayu.  For 
47  1-12  see  §§  95  iv,  109  iv. 

(vi)  viii  95-101,  in  Dimeter  Usnih  and  various  lyric  metres, 
addressed  chiefly  to  Indra. 

(vii)     i  127-139,  in  Atyasti  and  similar  metres.      Attach  ix  111. 

105.  II.  Stanzas  consisting  of  a  varying  number  of  dimeter 
verses  are  specially  characteristic  of  Mandala  v :  much  the  most 
common  form  is  Anustubh  with  an  extra  verse  in  the  last  stanza, 
but  we  also  find  Gayatri  with  an  extra  verse  in  the  first  stanza 
(28  4-6,  82  1-3)  and  other  variations.  There  are  also  several  lyric 
hymns  in  this  collection.  The  trimeter  hymns  mostly  shew  the 
characteristics  of  the  normal  or  cretic  period,  and  are  therefore  pro- 
bably later  additions.     A  similar  collection  is  found  in  x  20-26. 

Several  of  the  short  collections  in  Mandala  viii  are  more  akin 
to  this  group  than  the  last,  though  a  strict  line  cannot  be  drawn. 


60  The  early  Anustubh  groups 

The  second  Mandala  contains  a  nucleus  of  early  hymns  which 
have  features  in  common  both  with  this  group  and  with  the  next. 

Group  II.     The  hymns  included  are  : 

(i)  Early  hymns  of  Mandala  v.  These  include  all  the  lyric, 
Anustubh,  and  Pankti,  and  at  least  those  Gayatrl  hymns  in  which  the 
number  of  verses  in  the  stanza  varies :  aLso  those  Tristubh  hymns 
which  have  decasyllabic  variations  or  extra  verses,  and  all  hymns 
containing  ddnastutayah.  The  following  list  will  be  roughly  correct : 
2  (§  94  iv),  6,  7,  9,  10,  16-25,  27  (§  97  v),  28  4-6  (§  94  ii),  30  i-i4 
(§  97  v),  33  (§§  94  iii,  97  v),  35,  36  (§§  94  v,  97  v),  38-40  3,  41  (§  94 
iii-v),  42  and  43  (§  94  iv),  45  (§  94  iii),  50,  51  1-13  (§§  94  iii,  97  ii), 
52,  53,  56,  61  (§  97  v),  64-67,  68  and  70  (§§  94  viii,  97  i),  71  and  72 
(§  97  i),  73-75,  78  1-3,  79,  82  (§  94  ii,  viii),  84,  86,  87. 

The  family  names  found  are  Atri  in  2  6,  7  8,  10,  22  1,  4,  39  5,  51  8, 
67  5,  72  1,  73  6,  7,  74  1,  and  Sydvdsoa  52  r,  61  5,  9. 

The  appearance  of  cretic  variations  makes  us  hesitate  to  ascribe 
4,  78  4,  and  81  to  the  original  collection,  though  the  proper  names 
reappear  in  them,  as  also  in  15  and  *40  5-9. 

The  refrain  stanza  sdm  asvinoh  is  only  appropriate  to  76  and  77, 
and  would  therefore  seem  to  have  been  added  later  to  42  and  43. 

Attach  ix  98-101,  on  account  of  the  similarit}7  of  metre  (§  94  vii). 

(ii)  In  the  collection  x  20-26  the  prevailing  metre  is  Anustubh, 
with  several  variations.  In  21,  24,  25  half  verses  occur  which  form  a 
refrain  vi  vo  made . . .vivaksase,  containing  the  family  name  Vimada, 
which  also  occurs  20  10a,  23  6a  7b  [*24  4c].  In  20  we  have  Trochaic 
Gayatrl,  in  22  uneven  lyric  metre  ;  in  26  a  large  proportion  of  the 
verses  are  catalectic.  23  is  in  contaminated  Jagati,  but  this  hymn  is 
not  to  be  separated  from  the  rest,  for  it  also  contains  the  family  name 
(w.  6a  7b),  and  the  frequency  of  catalectic  cadence  finds  a  parallel 
in  26. 

Attach  x  99  (§  94  iii),  which  has  the  refrain  isam  urjam...  in 
common  with  x  20 ;  and,  on  its  analogy,  the  other  lyric,  early 
Anustubh,  and  decasyllabic  hymns  in  bk.  x,  and  those  with  which 
they  are  associated,  viz.  93,  105,  132  (all  in  uneven  lyric  metres), 
126  1-7  (lyric),  143  (Anustubh;  Atri  is  named  la  2d  3a),  144  and 
172  (§  94  v). 

(iii)  The  collection  viii  35-38  is  connected  with  Mandala  v  by 
the  name  Atri  in  35  19a,  36  6a  7b,  37  7b,  38  8b,  usually  with  the 
addition  of  the  name  Sydvdsva,  and  by  the  use  of  a  lyric  metre 
somewhat  resembling  that  of  v  87  and  x  132.  This  metre  however 
appears  to  glide  into  Mahapankti,  and  so  far  it  is  associated  with  a 
later  period. 

(iv)  Other  groups  in  the  eighth  Mandala  which  are  generally 
similar  are  those  which  extend  from  60  to  79,  and  92  to  94.  For 
resemblance  of  metre  see  §  94  ii  a,  b.  The  proper  names  that  occur 
are  Atri  73  3a  7a  8b,  Priyamedha  69  8b  18b,  Purumllha  71  14c, 
Virupa  75  6b. 

Attach  x  73,  74  (Priyamedha  73  lib  :  cf.  §  94  v). 


The  decasyllabic  groups  61 

(v)  The  nucleus  of  early  hymns  contained  in  Mandala  ii  may  be 
roughly  denned  to  consist  of  the  following  hymns  :  4  (§  94  iii  a) 
5  (§  94  vii),  6  (§  94  viii),  1 1  ,-2o  (§  94  iii  c),  19,  20  (§  94  iii  a),  22  (lyric)', 
41  1-9  (§  97  i,  ii),  16-18  (Anust.  and  Byh.,  cf.  ix  98,  99  :  see  also 
§  97  iv).  The  name  Grtsamada  occurs  in  4  9a,  19  8a,  [39  8b],  41  18c, 
and  Sunahotra  in  [18  6c]  and  41  17c.  The  refrain  brhdd  vadema  is 
wanting  in  ii  4  :  it  occurs  in  11,  19,  20  as  concluding  a  single  final 
stanza  which  may  have  been  attached  to  these  hymns  later. 

A  similar  nucleus  is  found  in  hymns  i  120  1-9  (uneven  lyric),  121, 
and  122  (%  94  iii  a,  v),  the  name  Pajra  occurring  i  122  7b  8c,  and 
Pajriya  120  5b. 

Attach  i  2,  3  (§110  ii),  x  61,  which  has  iambic  rhythm  (§  94  v), 
and  many  decasyllabic  verses,  and  the  verses  lie  lid  in  common  with 
i  121  (5c  5d);  x  77,  78,  of  which  the  metre  appears  to  be  parallel  to 
that  of  ii  11  (§  94  iii  d);  and  x  147,  148,  of  which  the  latter  is 
decasyllabic,  and  has  verses  2b  2c  in  common  with  ii  1 1  (4d  5a). 

106.  III.  With  the  sixth  Mandala  we  first  meet  a  large 
homogeneous  collection  in  the  existing  Samhita,  text.  The 
principal  metre  is  Tristubh,  and  decasyllabic  and  iambic  variations 
are  frequent :  the  family  name  Bharadvdja  is  common,  refrain 
verses  are  occasional.  Much  the  same  is  the  character  of  the 
collections  i  58-64  (Gotama  Nodhas),  74-93  (Gotama),  165-191 
(Mana). 

Group  III.     The  collections  included  may  be  denned  as  follows  : — 

(i)  i  58-64.  Hymns  60,  61,  tf3  contain  a  very  large  proportion  of 
decasyllabic  variations.  The  name  Gotama  occurs  in  60  5b,  61  16b, 
62  13a,  63  9a;  Nodhas  in  61  14d,  62  13c,  64  lb.  All  the  hymns 
except  59  contain  the  refrain  pratar  maksu  ...  . 

Detach  i  59.  This  hymn  has  iambic  rhythm,  and  the  family  name 
Bharadvdja  in  7b :  but  it  clearly  does  not  belong  to  this  collection, 
and  the  ascription  to  Agni  Vaisvanara  seems  to  indicate  a  late  date 
(§  98  iii). 

Attach  viii  80—87  (80  has  the  Gotama  Nodhas  refrain),  ix  93,  94 
(§  94  v ;  93  has  the  Gotama  Nodhas  refrain). 

(ii)  i  74-93.  This  collection  has  a  greater  variety  of  metres  than 
any  collection  of  the  same  length,  most  of  them  indicating  the  bardic 
period.  The  name  Gotama  occurs  77  5a,  78  la  2a,  79  10b,  85  lib, 
88  4c  5b,  92  7b.  The  collection  is  distinguished  by  a  small  group  of 
Soma  hymns  (91). 

Detach  i  83  and  84  13-15  (§  103). 

Attach  viii  88-90  (Gotama  88  4d)  and  ix  88,  in  which  stanza 
8  =  i  91   3  (see  also  §  94  v). 

(iii)  i  165-190.  The  prevailing  metre  is  Tristubh,  with  many 
decasyllabic  variations.  The  name  Mana  or  Manya  occurs  165  14b 
15b,  169  8a,  171  5a,  177  5b,  182  8b,  184  4b  5b,  189  8b:  Agastya 
only  in  184  5d.  The  refrain  vidydmesdm  ...  is  regular:  in  165-168, 
175-176,  183-184  respectively  it  concludes  stanzas  which  are  common 


62  The  Bharadvdja  hymns 

to  the  hymns  thus  connected.  The  collection  is  remarkable  in  con- 
taining only  a  single  Agni  hymn.  A  connection  with  Mandala  vi  is 
indicated  by  the  recurrence  of  174  2b  as  vi  20  10c,  and  of  174  9  as 
vi  20  12. 

Detach  i  182  (§§  95  ii,  103),  188  (§§  98  viii,  103). 

Attach  i  104,  x  48-50,  which  are  marked  by  decasyllabic  variations 
(§§  94  iii  a,  v). 

(iv)  vi.  Besides  Tristubh  hymns,  which  have  often  decasyllabic 
variations,  this  Mandala  contains  several  hymns  in  Gayatri  and  in 
Brhati-Satobrhati  Pragathas,  the  latter  seldom  being  quite  regular. 
Several  hymns,  both  lyric  and  trimeter,  have  occasional  extra  verses. 
The  name  Bharadvdja  occurs  10  6c,  15  3e,  16  5c  33a,  17  14c,  23  10b, 
25  9d,  31  4e,  35  4d,  47  25b,  48  7c  13a,  50  15b,  51  12b,  63  10c,  65  6b. 
The  refrain  verse  td  tarema  ...  occurs  2  lie,  14  6e,  15  15e,  and  partly 
in  6&amp;  8d;  the  verse  mddema  satdhimdh  ...  ends  hymns  4,  10,  12,  13, 
17,  24;  the  verse  rayti  madema  ...  ends  hymn  19  and  recurs  49  13d; 
the  resemblance  between  these  verses  seems  to  point  to  a  common 
authorship.  The  collection  is  marked  by  a  large  group  of  hymns  to 
Indra  (30-41),  of  which  each  consists  of  tive  Tristubh  stanzas.  There 
are  a  few  ddnastutayah. 

These  characteristics  are  wanting  in  the  Agni  hymns  1,  5-9,  in 
hymns  47  and  52,  59-62,  and  generally  from  68  9  to  the  end  of  the 
Mandala  ;  and  the  Pusan  group  53—58  is  marked  by  late  linguistic 
forms.  It  would  therefore  seem  that  considerable  additions  have  been 
made  to  the  collection  at  some  later  period. 

Detach  1,  5,  6  (§  95  ii),  7  (§  95  i)  and  8  (§  98  iii),  9  (§§  98  iii,  103), 
47  1-21  (§§  95  i,  ii,  102,  103),  52  4-12  (§  95  ii),  16,  17  (§  98  vi),  53-57 
(§§  102,  103),  58  (§  95  i),  59  1-6  (§§  94  i,  103),  68  9-73  (§§  95  i,  ii, 
98  i,  iv,  102).  The  position  of  several  other  hymns  is  doubtful :  see 
especially  §  95  ii. 

107.  IV.  The  seventh  Mandala  is  also  on  the  whole  homo- 
geneous. The  predominant  metre  is  Tristubh,  in  which  iambic 
rhythm  is  far  more  marked  than  elsewhere  in  the  Rigveda,  but 
decasyllabic  variations  are  rare :  there  are  found  also  several 
Brhati-Satobrhati  Pragathas  of  a  very  regular  character.  Although 
these  metres  are  quite  strange  to  the  later  periods  of  the  Rigveda, 
they  are  employed  with  a  regularity  which  contrasts  strikingly 
with  the  variety  of  form  exhibited  in  Groups  I-III,  and  brings 
this  collection  nearer  to  the  normal  period.  The  name  Vasistha 
is  common  both  in  the  singular  and  plural.  Some  hymns  of  a 
similar  character  are  found  in  the  group  i  140-160,  and  in  the 
ninth  Mandala. 

Group  IV.  (i)  The  long  list  of  iambic  hymns  in  Mandala  vii  is 
given  in  §  94  v:  the  collection  is  also  marked  by  several  hymns  in 
Viraj  metre  (§94  iv). 

The  name  Vasistha  appears  as  follows :  vii  1  8b,  7  7a,  9  6a,  12  3b, 


Elder  and  younger  Vasisthas  63 

22  3b,  23  lb  6b,  26  5a,  37  4d,  39  7a,  42  6a,  59  3b,  70  6c,  73  3d, 
76  6a  7b,  77  6b,  80  la,  86  5d,  88  lb  4a,  90  7b,  95  6a,  96  Id  3d :  and 
outside  the  Mandala  in  x  *15  8b,  65  15a,  66  14a,  122  8a,  150  5c,  and 
in  association  with  the  names  of  other  bards  in  *x  181  Id.  It  also 
occurs  in  i  112,  vii  18,  *33,  and  in  *x  95,  but  not  as  an  author's  name. 

The  refrain  yuydni  pdtd  ...  is  usually  found  at  the  end  of  a  stanza 
common  to  two  consecutive  hymns,  viz.  1  1-20  and  21-25,  3-4,  7-8, 
20-21,  24-25,  39-40,  60-61,  62-63,  64-65,  67  and  69,  70-71,  72-73, 
84-85,  90-91,  97-98,  99-100.  Also  the  hymns  vii  28-30,  34  and  56, 
41  and  80,  and  x  65,  66  have  the  same  concluding  stanzas  in  each 
group.  The  refrain  is  found  independently  in  hymns  vii  9,  11-14,  19, 
22,  23,  26,  27,  35-37,  42.  43,  45-48,  51,  53,  54,  57,  58,  75-79,  86-88, 
92,93,95;         ix  90,  97  1-3,  4-6 ;         x  122. 

Many  hymns  shew  cretic  variations  (§  95  ii).  Four  of  them  are 
Agni  hymns,  and  of  these  two  are  addressed  to  Agni  Vaisvanara 
(§  98  iii) :  two  of  the  four  want  the  refrain.  Another  (54)  is  addressed 
to  Vastospati,  and  out  of  order  (§§  98  i,  101).  Another  (101)  is 
addressed  to  Parjanya  (§  98  vi),  and  this  also  wants  the  refrain. 
These,  like  the  four  Agni  hymns,  will  most  naturally  be  explained  as 
late  additions.  Hymn  69  occurs  in  the  Asvin  group,  from  which  there 
is  not  sufficient  reason  to  separate  it.  The  historical  hymn  vii  18  1-2 1 
wants  the  refrain,  but  it  is  accompanied  by  a  ddnastuti  (st.  22-25) 
which  has  the  usual  iambic  rhythm  :  the  Usas  hymns  78-80  form  a 
group  of  three,  and  have  the  usual  refrain.  But  the  change  of  rhythm, 
in  the  one  case  running  through  21  stanzas,  and  in  the  other  through 
three  successive,  though  short,  hymns  makes  it  difficult  to  think  that 
any  of  these  hymns  are  really  homogeneous  with  the  rest  of  the 
collection.  If  this  is  a  right  view,  neither  the  mention  of  Vasistha 
(9  6a,  18  passim),  nor  the  refrain  verse  is  a  sure  indication  that  a 
particular  hymn  belongs  to  the  original  collection. 

The  characteristic  iambic  rhythm  is  wanting  in  the  whole  series  of 
hymns  which  extend  (out  of  their  order)  from  44  to  55  (§  101)  and  in 
all  hymns  outside  the  Mandala  :  whilst  hymns  82,  83  are  in  Jagati, 
a  metre  strange  to  the  collection  as  a  whole ;  they  have  a  concluding 
stanza  in  common,  but  it  does  not  include  the  refrain  verse.  All  these 
hymns  are  probably  the  work  of  a  later  period,  though  some  of  them 
may  have  been  composed  by  members  of  the  Vasistha  family.  The 
general  regularity  of  the  Gayatri  hymns  to  Agni  and  some  others,  and 
the  absence  of  any  mention  of  Vasistha  in  them,  makes  it  likely  they 
are  also  later  additions. 

Detach  2  (§  98  viii),  5  and  6  (£  98  iii),  9-13  (§  95  ii,  98  iii),  15, 
18  1-21,  41  (§  102),  44-48  (§  98  ii,  vii),  51-55  1  Q  98  iv,  vii),  59  7-8 
(§  95  ii),  9-11  (§  101),  78-80  (§  95  ii),  82  and  83  (Jagati),  89,  101  and 
102  (§§  95  ii,  98  vi,  103). 

Attach  i  55-57  (§  94  v),  ix  70  (§  94  v)  with  71,  76  and  79  (§  94  v), 
107  (Brh.-Sat.  and  Viraj),  109  (§  94  iii  b),  110  (§  94  iv),  x  1  and  6 
(§  94  iii  6  and  v),  150  (lyric  metre,  Vasistha  5c). 

(ii)  Outside  Mandala  vii  there  appears  in  the  collection  i  140-160 
a  nucleus  somewhat  resembling  it,  in  that  iambic  rhythm  is  common 
(§  94  v),  and  hymn  149  is  in  Viraj  metre.  The  name  Mdmateya, 
147  3a,  152  6a,  and  158  6a,  is  also  a  connecting  link.     The  hymns 


64  The  Kanva  groups 

that  agree  in  character  are  i  141,  144,  147-156  and  158.     See  also 
§  97  iii. 

Detach  i  140  (§  95  ii),  142  (§§  95  iii,  98  viii),  145  (§  103),  146 
(§  95  ii),  159  and  160  (§§  95  ii,  98  iv).  Also  hymns  143  and  157, 
though  their  rhythm  is  not  very  marked,  would  seem  more  probably  to 
belong  to  the  later  additions. 

108.  V.  The  Kanva  collections,  although  scattered  in  Man- 
dalas i  and  viii,  are  easily  recognized  by  their  distinctive  metres 
(Gayatri,  Trochaic  Gayatri,  and  Brhati-Satobrhatl  Pragathas),  and 
by  the  family  name.  These  collections  are  i  36-43,  44-50,  viii 
1-5,  6-11,  32-34,  49-57. 

Group  V.  The  name  Kanva  appears  i  36  8c  10c  lib  17b  19c, 
37  lc  14b,  39  7d  9b;  44  8c,  45  5c,  46  9a,  47  2c  4c  5a  10c,  48  4c, 
49  4d;  viii  1  8c,  2  16c  22a  38c  40b,  3  16a,  4  2c  3d  20a,  5  4c  23a 
25a;  6  3a  8c  lib  21b  31a  34a  43c,  7  18b  19c  32b,  8  3d  4c  8c  20a, 
9  3c  9d  14d,  10  2b ;  32  lb,  33  3a,  34  lb  4a ;  49  5d  10a,  50  10a, 
52  8d,  55  4a:  also  x  115  5a,  for  which  see  §  104  ii.  Further  we 
have  the  names  Praskanva  i  44  6c,  45  3d,  viii  3  9d,  51  2a,  54  8d, 
Medhyatithi  or  Medhatithi  i  36  10c  11a  17c,  viii  1  30d,  2  40b,  8  20a, 
33  4b,  49  9c,  51  lc,  and  ix  43  3c  (see  below),  and  Vatsa  viii  6  lc,  8 
7c  8d  lie  15b  19d,  9  lb  6c  15d,  11  7a.  The  names  Upastuta,  Vimada, 
Virupa,  Sobharl,  Atri  and  Priyamedha  also  occur  in  Kanva  hymns, 
and  connect  them  with  others  contained  in  Groups  I — III. 

Detach  i  50  1-9  (§§  98  v,  102). 

Attach  i  14  (Kanva  2a  5b),  27  1-12  and  30  1-15  (§  94  viii),  ix  43 
(Medhyatithi  3c),  58  (§  97  v),  62  4-6  (§  94  viii),  66  16-18  (§  94  ii,  viii), 
19-21  (§  94  viii),  67  25-27  (§  94  ii),  x  140  (cf.  6c  with  i  45  7c  :  see  also 
§  94  v),  185  (§§  94  viii,  97  i). 

109.  VI.  The  principal  collections  of  the  normal  period  are 
Mandalas  iii  and  iv  :  to  these  are  to  be  added  the  larger  parts  of 
Mandalas  ii  and  v,  and  of  the  collections  i  1-30  and  ix  1-67,  68-97. 
All  of  these  shew  a  very  close  adherence  to  the  normal  forms  of 
the  Gayatri,  Tristubh,  and  Jagatl  stanza  :  but  the  third  Mandala 
has  certain  features  almost  peculiar  to  itself  which  make  a  separate 
treatment  desirable. 

Group  VI.     The  hymns  included  fall  under  five  headings : — 

(i)  The  hymns  in  Mandala  iv  are  chiefly  in  Tristubh  metre,  but 
there  are  several  Gayatri  hymns.  Common  concluding  stanzas  are 
found  in  the  Agni  hymns  13,  14,  the  Indra  hymns  16,  17  and  19  to  24, 
and  the  hymns  43  and  44  to  the  Asvins.  The  name  of  Vamadeva 
appears  iv  16  18a,  and  may  be  that  of  the  author  of  the  hymns  :  if  we 
are  to  interpret  iv  4  lib  literally,  the  author  of  that  hymn  is  a  son  of 
Gotama  :  other  proper  names  that  occur  are  Kutsa  16  10b  11a  12a, 
26  lc,  30  4b,  Kakfivat  26  lb,  Usana  26  Id,  Divodasa  26  3d,  30  20c, 


The  Vamadeva  groups  65 

and  again  Gotama  32  9a  12a.  Both  iambic  and  cretic  rhythm  are 
rare:  lyric  and  other  early  metres  are  occasional,  as  in  1  1-3,  10,  17, 
21,  27,  and  sometimes  take  forms  peculiar  to  this  Mandala.  On  the 
whole  there  seems  little  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Mandala  contains 
either  a  nucleus  of  older  hymns  or  a  supplement  of  later  additions  :  in 
any  case  only  a  very  small  part  of  the  Mandala  is  not  homogeneous. 

Attach  x  126  8  =  iv  12  6,  and  x  131  (refrain  suviriasya ...  as  in 
iv  51). 

(ii)  The  greater  part  of  the  hymns  of  Mandala  ii  seem  to  form  a 
similar  collection,  except  that  Jagati  is  common.  The  Indra  hymns 
ii  15-18  have  the  concluding  stanza  nundm  sti  te  ...  ,  which  is  also 
appended  to  the  earlier  hymns  11,  19,  20  :  its  refrain  verse  is  further 
found  in  the  hymn-pairs  1  and  2,  13  and  14,  and  in  the  stanza  which 
concludes  each  of  the  hymns  27-29,  though  it  is  only  appropriate 
in  28.  But,  unlike  Mandala  iv,  many  hymns  which  are  not  homo- 
geneous appear  to  be  included  in  the  Mandala. 

Detach  3  (§§  95  i,  ii,  98  viii),  4-6  and  11  1-20  (§  105  v),  12  and  13 
(§  103),  14  (connected  with  13  by  the  concluding  stanza  asmdbhyam 
tdd...),  19,  20  and  22  (§  105  v),  39  and  40  (§§  95  ii,  103),  41  1-9 
(§  105  v),  10-12  (§§  101,  103),  16-18  (§  105  v). 

Attach  ix  86  46-48  (refrain  brhdd  vadema...),  x  91,  92  (x  91  io  =  ii 

14 

(iii)  Of  similar  character  are  the  majority  of  the  Trimeter  hymns 
of  Mandala  v,  Jagati  being  again  common  :  and  here  we  may  naturally 
place  those  Gayatri  hymns  in  that  Mandala  which  we  have  no  special 
reason  to  assign  to  an  earlier  date.  Amongst  these  hymns  57,  58  have 
in  common  the  refrain  stanza  haye  ndrah...,  and  76,  77  the  stanza 

sdm  asvinoh The  hymns  thus  included  are  1,  3,  8,  11-15,  26,  29, 

31,  32,  34,  37,  40  4,  44  1-3,  46-49,  54,  55,  57-60,  63,  69,  76,  77,  78  4, 
80,  81,  85. 

Detach  v  4  (§§  95  ii,  98  iii),  5  (§§  98  viii,  103),  28  1-3  (§  95  i),  62 
(§  103). 

(iv)  The  group  viii  39-42,  having  Mahapankti  metre  (§  95  iv) 
with  the  refrain  ndbhantam  anyake  same,  containing  a  play  on  the 
family  name  Nabhdka  (40  4a  5a),  perhaps  belongs  to  this  period :  for 
although  the  punning  refrain  reminds  us  of  the  Vimada  hymns 
(x  20-26),  yet  the  regularity  of  the  metre  stands  in  great  contrast 
to  them.  Further  the  concluding  verse  viii  40  12d  is  identical  with 
iv  50  6d. 

Attach  viii  47  1-12  (also  Mahapankti),  x  133  (refrain  ndbhantam 
anyakesaam  ...)  and  134  (Mahapankti). 

(v)  The  indications  of  date  in  the  Soma  Pavamana  hymns  are 
very  slight,  and  therefore  a  great  number  of  them  probably  belong  to 
this  period.  The  great  number  of  hymns  in  Gayatri  metre,  and  the 
comparatively  large  number  in  JagatT,  further  favour  this  conclusion. 
In  ix  89  the  refrain  suviriasya  ...  is  found,  as  in  iv  51  lOd. 

Detach  5  1-7  (§  98  viii),  43  (§  108  v),  58  (§  97  v),  61-67  (§  110  ii), 
70,  71,  76  and  79  (§  107  i),  80  (§  95  ii),  88  (§  106  ii),  90  (§111  ii),  93 
and  94  (§  106  i),  97  1-6  (§  111  ii),  34-51  (§  95  ii),  55-58  (§  111  1), 
98-111   (lyric  metres), 

A.  * 


66  The  Kusika  groups 

110.  VII.  The  third  Mandala  has  a  metrical  character  of  its 
own,  in  that  iambic  variations  of  the  type  ^  h  -  ^  only  are  fairly 
common,  side  by  side  with  cretic  variations :  so  that  the  hymns 
seem  to  be  intermediate  in  character  between  the  Vasistha  hymns 
and  those  of  the  cretic  period.  The  metres  used  are  Tristubh  and 
Gayatri.     The  family  name  Kusika  appears  occasionally. 

The  collections  which  extend  from  i  1  to  30  are  almost  entirely 
composed  in  Gayatri,  the  triplet  being  specially  common  :  this 
metre  may  perhaps  be  connected  with  that  of  the  third  Mandala. 

Group  VII.     The  hymns  included  are  as  follows  : 

(i)  Mandala  iii.  The  refrain  stanza  ildm  agne  . . .  connects  hymns 
1,  5-7,  15,  22,  23:  and  the  refrain  stanza  sundih  huvema  ...  Irymns 
30-32,  34,  36,  38,  39,  43,  48-50.  The  family  name  Kusika  appears  26 
Id  3b,  30  20d,  33  5d,  42  9c,  50  4d,  53  9d  lOd  11a:  we  find  also 
Visvdmitra  1  21b,  18  4c,  53  7c  9c  12c  13a,  and  Jamadagni  53  15b, 
62  18a.  Hymns  in  Brhati  (9  i-8,  44,  45)  appear  to  be  characteristic 
of  this  collection:  such  hymns  as  10,  11,  13,  16,  23-25,  41  may  be 
of  earlier  date  than  the  rest,  but  of  this  we  cannot  be  sure  in  so 
peculiar  a  collection  :  cf.  §  94  i,  ii,  iv,  v,  viii. 

Detach  2  and  3  (Jagati  hymns  :  see  also  §  98  iii),  4  (§  98  viii),  8  1-9 
(§§  95  i,  98  viii),  17  (§  98  iii),  26  1-3  (as  2  and  3). 

Attach  x  89  and  104  (refrain  suuam  huvema...),  160  (5d  vaydm 
indra  tud  sundm  huvema). 

(ii)  i  1-30.  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  any  of  these  hymns  can  be 
rightly  attributed  to  the  Kusika  family,  since  the  name  only  occurs  in 
i  10  11a,  in  a  hymn  out  of  order,  and  in  an  unusual  metre  (Anustubh). 
The  majority  of  the  hymns  are  in  Gayatri  triplets,  though  one  series 
(4-9)  consists  of  hymns  each  containing  ten  stanzas. 

Detach  2  and  3  (§§  94  viii,  97  i,  ii,  iv,  101),  13  (§§  98  viii,  103), 
14  (§  108),  22  i3-2i  m  102,  103),  27  1-12  (§  94  viii),  28,  29  (g  98  viii, 
103),  30  1-15  (§  94  viii). 

Attach  ix  61-67  30,  (except  as  in  §  108)  also  composed  in  Gayatri 
triplets. 

(iii)  i  65-73.  The  series  65-70  in  Dvipada  Viraj  might  suggest 
the  bardic  period,  but  we  do  not  find  elsewhere  hymns  so  regular  in 
this  metre.  The  number  of  stanzas  in  the  hymn  corresponds  to  that 
regularly  employed  in  the  series  i  4-9.  If  the  hymns  71—73  are 
rightly  associated  with  65-70,  it  follows  from  the  regularity  of  the 
rhythm  that  the  whole  group  must  be  assigned  to  the  normal  period  ; 
also  the  stanza  i  73  3  is  almost  identical  with  iii  55  21. 

(iv)  The  hymns  i  116-119  are  marked  by  the  extreme  frequency 
of  iambic  and  cretic  variations  side  by  side  (§§  94  v,  95  ii):  thus  they 
correspond  metrically  more  nearly  with  the  standard  of  Mandala  iii 
than  that  of  any  other  collection.  There  are  numerous  proper  names  ; 
but  as  they  are  used  in  historical  references  they  supply  no  clue  to  the 
authorship.     As  to  the  refrain  suvirdsah  ...  in  117  25d  see  §  100. 


The  cretic  group  67 

Detach  120  1-9  (§  105  v)  and  122  (§§  94  iii  a,  105  v):  the  colourless 
hymn  121  perhaps  belongs  to  these  also :  123-126  5  (§§  95  i,  ii,  98  ix). 

111.  VIIL,  IX.  Of  the  hymns  with  which  we  still  have  to  deal, 
a  large  number  are  marked  by  cretic  rhythm,  and  again  a  large  num- 
ber by  the  comparative  frequency  of  late  linguistic  forms.  Although 
in  many  cases  these  two  features  are  combined,  yet  we  may  dis- 
tinguish the  collection  i  94-115  as  being  on  the  whole  more 
strongly  marked  by  its  metre,  and  the  collection  i  31-35  and  the 
hymns  remaining  in  Mandala  x,  as  being  more  regularly  dis- 
tinguished by  the  language.  In  both  groups  Tristubh  and  JagatI 
are  almost  the  only  metres  used,  except  so  far  as  they  are  occasionally 
contaminated  by  Anustubh  and  Gayatrl  stanzas. 

Group  VIII.     The  hymns  included  are 

(i)  The  collection  i  94-115,  in  which  the  hymns  are  connected  by 
the  refrain  distich  tan  no  mitrb  vdrunah... :  a  refrain  which  itself  bears 
the  stamp  of  comparatively  late  date  in  its  reduction  of  the  Pantheon 
to  a  catalogue,  and  the  inclusion  in  it  of  Sindhu  and  Dyava-Prthivl. 
The  refrain  is  found  in  94-96,  98,  100-103,  105  19,  106-115."  The 
hymn  111  differs  in  a  startling  way  in  its  rhythm,  which  is  markedly 
iambic ;  but  it  is  connected  with  the  rest  by  its  refrain. 

Detach  i  104  (§  94  iii  a,  101). 

Attach  ix  97  55-58  (stanza  58  has  the  refrain  as  above),  x  33  (2ab, 
3ab  =  i  105  8).  Also  i  51-54  (see  §  95  ii,  and  compare  the  mention  of 
Vimada  in  51  3c  with  that  in  112  19a  :  of  KaksTvat  51  13b  with  that 
in  112  lie;  of  Kutsa  51  6a,  53  10c  with  112  9c^  and  so  forth). 

(ii)  The  numerous  additions  to  Mandala  vii,  of  which  many  have 
the  refrain  yuyam  pata . . . ,  constitute  another  collection  very  like 
i  94-115,  and  consisting  of  the  following  hymns:  2  1-7 \  5,  6,  9-13, 
15,  18  i-2T,  41,  44-48,  51-55  i,  59  7-11,  78-80,  82,  83,  89.  See 
especially  §§  95  ii,   107  above. 

Attach  ix  90,  97  1-3,  4-6,  x  65,  Q6,  122,  all  having  the  Vasistha 
refrain,  but  a  general  cretic  rhythm  (§95  ii). 

(iii)  The  following  hymns,  detached  from  the  groups  with  which 
they  stand  in  the  Samhita  text  for  reasons  already  indicated:  i  59, 
123-126  5,  140,  143,  145,  146,  157,  159,  160;  iii  2,  3,  17,  26  1-3; 
v  4;    vi  1,  5-8,  52  4-12,  16-17,  53-59  6,  68  9-73 ;   ix  80,  97  34-51. 

Group  IX.  The  following  hymns  may  be  assigned  to  the  cretic 
period,  not  so  much  on  account  of  the  rhythm  (though,  as  will  be 
shewn  later,  it  approximates  to  the  cretic  standard),  as  on  account  of 
the  comparative  frequency  of  late  linguistic  forms,  and  other  notes 
indicating  an  approximation  to  the  popular  Rigveda  : — 

1  It  seems  not  improbable  that  the  Apriya  stanzas  vii  2  1-7,  which  have  some 
traces  of  iambic  rhythm,  are  earlier  than  the  stanzas  8-1 1,  which  occur  also  in 
iii  4.  In  any  case  some  association  between  the  younger  Vasistha  hymns  and  the 
third  Mandala  is  indicated. 

5—2 


68  The  transition  group 

(i)     Hymns  i  31-35  (see  also  §§  95  i,  102). 

(ii)     The  small  groups  extending  from  x  35  to  x  84. 

Detach  as  above  the  hymns  that  have  early  metres,  viz.  48-50 
(§  106  iii),  61  (§  94  iii),  73  and  74  (§  105  iv),  77  and  78  (§  105  v), 
and  on  account  of  the  refrain  65  and  66  (§  107  i). 

(iii)  The  following  isolated  hymns  in  the  first  nine  Mandalas,  for 
the  reasons  indicated  in  the  lists  of  hymns  detached  from  each  group : 
i  13,  22  13-21,  28,  29,  50  1-9,  83,  84  13-15,  142,  182,  188;  ii  3,  12, 
13,  14,  39,  40,  41  10-12  j  iii  4,  81-9;  v  5,  28  1-3,  62 ;  vi  9,  47  1-21  : 
vii  101,  102;     ix  5  1-7. 

(iv)  The  following  hymns  in  Mandala  x,  for  which  (where  other 
indications  fail)  the  position  in  that  Mandala  affords  some  presumption 
of  late  date:  2  (§§  102,  103),  3  and  4,  5  (§  95  ii),  7,  8  (§  95  ii),  9  1-5 
(§  102),  29,  30  (§§  95  ii,  98  vii),  31,  32  1-5,  96,  100,  106  (§§  95  ii,  103), 
110  (§§  98  viii,  102,  103),  111  and  112  (§  95  ii),  113,  116,  118,  123, 
124  6-8  (§  95  i),  127  (§  103),  138,  139  1-3,  156,  171,  176,  178  (§  95  ii), 
187,  188  (§98  iii). 

x  106  is  further  connected  with  ii  39  by  the  numerous  duals  in 
each  hymn  which  are  combined  by  Sandhi  with  iva. 

112.  The  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  proper  being  thus  roughly 
divided  into  nine  groups,  it  becomes  of  interest  to  enquire  into  the 
linguistic  character  of  these  groups,  and  the  relative  nearness  of 
each  to  the  popular  Rigveda.  The  ninth  group,  containing  as  it 
does  most  of  the  single  hymns  which  shew  a  large  proportion  of 
later  linguistic  notes,  is  naturally  the  nearest :  but  even  here  the 
early  linguistic  notes  are  three  times  as  many  as  the  late.  In  the 
remaining  groups  the  order  of  time  provisionally  adopted,  that  of 
the  bardic,  normal,  and  cretic  periods,  corresponds  to  the  slow  but 
steady  relative  increase  of  the  later  features.  To  this  general 
statement  there  are  two  important  qualifications.  In  the  hymns 
in  various  metres,  chiefly  lyric,  which  compose  Group  I,  late 
linguistic  forms  are  extremely  rare,  and  these  may  therefore,  so 
far  as  the  argument  goes,  claim  to  be  the  earliest  hymns  in  the 
Rigveda.  On  the  other  hand,  the  hymns  of  the  Kanva  family 
appear  to  approach  linguistically  the  hymns  of  the  normal  period. 

This  linguistic  argument  must  not  be  unduly  pressed.  The  con- 
clusion last  indicated  seems  probable  in  itself,  because  the  Brhatl- 
Satobrhati  Pragathas  of  the  Kanva  family  shew,  both  in  external 
and  internal  form,  a  regularity  which  corresponds  sufficiently  with  the 
character  of  the  Tristubh  of  the  normal  period  :  and  also  because  the 
groups  concerned  have  one  metre  in  common,  the  normal  Gayatri. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  not  be  expected  that  the  statistics  now 
to  be  given  are  in  themselves  sufficient  to  establish  an  order  of  time 
throughout  the  nine  groups. 


Contents  of  the  ten  groups 


69 


113.  The  treatment  of  individual  hymns  in  this  chapter  has 
necessarily  been  summary  and  inadequate;  but  the  general  results 
are  confirmed  by  the  tables  on  pp.  54  and  69,  and  will  be  further 
tested  by  the  metrical  enquiries  in  the  following  chapters.  In 
this  way  it  will  be  possible  to  verify,  or  perhaps  necessary  to 
qualify,  this  provisional  arrangement  of  the  hymns  in  a  chrono- 
logical order.  Just  so  far  as  the  hymns  which  are  assigned  to  one 
period  reveal  points  of  agreement  other  than  those  upon  which 
the  grouping  is  based,  there  will  be  good  reason  to  believe  that 
the  original  grouping  really  corresponds  to  the  historical  facts. 

114.     Table  shewing  the  contents  of  the  Kigveda  as 
divided  into  homogeneous  groups. 


Group 

Trimeter  verses 

Dimeter  verses 

Linguistic  notes 

Lyric 

Jagati 

Total  i 

Lyric 

Anust. 

Trochaic 
Gayatri 

Total  ^ 

Early 

Late 

Per 

cent3 

I 

755 

32 

895 

1459 

56 

36 

2174 

1456 

85 

5-5 

II 

369 

56 

1429 

542 

992 

165 

2971 

2226 

169 

7 

III 

119 

435 

3058 

243 

276 

61 

1246 

2607 

166 

6-5 

IV 

167 

340 

2463 

258 

4 

3 

361 

1514 

102 

65 

V 

337 

4 

371 

613 

208 

251 

1924 

959 

81 

8 

VI 

17 

J  632 

4633 

10 

90 

3 

1954 

3094 

290 

8-5 

VII 

32 

100 

2083 

105 

22 

21 

1748 

1661 

181 

10 

VIII 

10 

999 

2628 

26 

64 

3 

318 

1220 

291 

19 

IX 

4 

1016 

2646 

8 

53 

0 

480 

971 

305 

24 

X 

13 

552 

3463 

44 

1478 

0 

1824 

414 

2112 

83-5 

Total 

1823 

5166 

23,669 

3308 

3213 

543 

15,000 

16,122 

3782 

19 

I— V4 

96 

14 

35 

95 

47 

94 

57 

VI,  VII 

2 

35 

29 

3 

4 

5 

26 

VIII,  IX 

1 

40 

22 

1 

4 

1 

5 

X 

i     a 

15 

1 

45 

0 

12 

1  The  verses  not  included  in  the  two  preceding  columns  are  Tristubh  or  Deca- 
syllabic Tristubh  verses. 

1  The  verses  not  included  in  the  three  preceding  columns  are  Gayatri,  Pahkti, 
or  Mahapahkti  verses. 

3  The  figures  in  this  column  shew  the  proportion  of  later  linguistic  forms  and 
words  in  each  100  of  the  early  and  late  forms  and  words  taken  together. 

4  The  figures  in  this  part  of  the  table  shew  how  the  matter  in  each  of  the  metres 
as  classified  is  distributed  between  the  four  periods.  Thus  almost  the  whole  of  the 
matter  in  the  lyric  metres  and  in  Trochaic  Gayatri  is  found  in  the  bardic  period : 
Anustubh  verse  is  found  chiefly  in  the  first  and  last  periods,  and  Jagati  chiefly  in 
the  two  intermediate  periods. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

SANDHI. 

115.  In  classical  Greek  and  Latin  verse  a  final  vowel  is 
usually  elided  or  omitted  from  calculation  if  the  next  word  begins 
with  a  vowel.  According  to  the  rules  of  classical  Sanskrit  a  vowel 
in  such  a  position  is  regularly  combined  with  the  vowel  following, 
so  that  the  two  syllables  coalesce  in  one.  In  the  Rigveda  the 
vowels  are  sometimes  combined,  as  in  classical  Sanskrit :  but  at 
other  times  each  retains  the  character  of  a  separate  syllable,  in 
which  case  hiatus  is  said  to  occur.  Although  hiatus  is  rarely 
shewn  in  the  Samhita  text,  it  can  be  restored  with  certainty  in 
a  great  number  of  passages  by  the  aid  of  the  metre. 

Thus  in  the  verse  vii  40  3d 

nd  tdsya  roZydh  pari-etd  asti  (text  paryetdsti) 

it  is  clear  from  the  metre  that  the  final  syllables  of  each  part  of 
the  word  parietd  retain  the  character  of  distinct  syllables. 

In  the  Rigveda  final  -a  and  -a  are  usually  combined  with  an 
initial  vowel  following,  whatever  it  may  be  :  but  final  -i  -I  -u  -u 
are  only  combined  when  followed  by  '  similar '  vowels.  It  is  the 
object  of  the  present  chapter  to  determine  the  practice  of  the 
Rigveda  in  these  points  and  others  of  the  same  character,  the 
extent  to  which  exceptions  are  permitted,  and  the  historical 
importance  of  these  exceptions. 

116.  The  discussion  in  this  chapter  is  limited  to  the  consideration 
of  the  treatment  of  final  vowels  and  diphthongs,  and  of  final  syllables 
ending  in  h  and  ra,  so  far  as  syllabic  combination  is  possible  with  the 
latter.  By  a  final  vowel  is  meant  a  vowel  occurring  at  the  end  of  a 
word  or  the  first  part  of  a  compound,  and  so  with  the  other  final 
syllables  concerned.  The  treatment  of  final  consonants  does  not  affect 
the  metre  except  as  included  above,  for  there  is  no  reason  to  think 
that  any  final  consonant  does  not  contribute  to  make  position. 

The  Sanskrit  Grammar  includes  under  the  heading  of  Sandhi  the 
treatment  of  the  final  vowels  of  stems  :  this  subject  is  here  reserved 
for  the  chapter  on  'Syllabic  Restoration.' 


Hiatus  subject  to  rule  71 

A  final  long  vowel  or  diphthong,  if  not  combined  with  a  vowel 
following,  is  frequently  reckoned  as  short :  this  subject  is  discussed  in 
the  chapter  on  '  Quantitative  Restoration.' 

117.  The  Saiiihita  text  rarely  admits  hiatus,  but  follows  the 
artificial  rules  of  the  later  Sanskrit  (Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar, 
§  103).  As  the  metrical  character  of  the  Rigveda  is  almost  entirely 
destroyed  by  this  method,  commentators  both  native  and  western 
claim  a  general  permission  to  restore  hiatus  in  all  cases.  The  con- 
sideration of  the  metre  however  shews  that  the  Vedic  poets  were 
guided  by  principles  and  that  deviations  from  these  principles  are 
comparatively  rare. 

Where  the  Samhita  text  shews  hiatus,  it  appears  often  to  be  guided 
by  a  true  appreciation  of  the  metre :  but  even  so  the  text  is  practically 
of  no  value  to  us  as  evidence. 

In  a  few  cases,  which  will  be  noticed  in  their  order,  the  text  uses 
diacritical  signs  to  denote  hiatus. 

118.  There  are  many  verses  in  which  the  restoration  of  hiatus  is 
doubtful,  either  because  the  normal  number  of  syllables  can  be  obtained 
in  more  than  one  way,  or  because  the  verses  in  question  may  be  inter- 
preted as  decasyllabic  or  defective.  In  all  such  instances  it  will  be 
reasonable  to  give  the  verse  that  interpretation  which  brings  it  as  a 
whole  most  nearly  into  agreement  with  the  metrical  character  of  the 
hymn  to  which  it  belongs  and  the  general  rules  of  Vedic  prosody. 
Thus  it  is  generally  desirable  to  assign  to  each  verse  a  normal  number 
of  syllables,  but  if  in  a  particular  hymn  the  number  of  shorter  verses 
is  considerable,  as  in  the  hymns  described  in  §  94  iii  as  decasyllabic,  it 
becomes  more  probable  that  the  particular  verse  is  also  shorter.  Where 
the  required  number  of  syllables  can  be  obtained  in  more  than  one 
way,  there  is  usually  one  method  which  is  in  better  agreement  with 
the  rules  of  prosody  than  any  other.  In  this  way  the  number  of  cases 
which  involve  any  serious  doubt  becomes  very  small :  the  consideration 
of  these  cases  in  detail  is  reserved  for  the  '  Metrical  Commentary ' : 
the  interpretation  implied  in  the  lists  included  in  the  text  is  always 
that  which  appears  to  the  writer  on  the  whole  the  most  probable. 

119.  Each  verse  in  the  Rigveda  is  an  independent  metrical 
unit  as  regards  Sandhi :  a  final  vowel  may  therefore  stand  at  the 
end  of  any  verse,  whether  the  next  verse  begins  with  a  vowel  or 
not,  without  hiatus  arising. 

Within  the  verse  hiatus  is  relatively  more  common  at  the 
caesura  than  elsewhere. 

The  Samhita  text  takes  as  its  unit  the  distich,  or  pair  of  trimeter 
or  dimeter  verses.  But  the  appearance  of  hiatus  seems  to  be  quite  as 
common  at  the  end  of  verses  a  and  c  as  at  the  end  of  verses  b  and  d, 
and  very  much  commoner  at  the  end  of  the  verse  than  at  the  caesura. 

Similarly  Sandhi  combination  is  almost  unknown  at  the  end  of  the 
verse,  but  there  are  many  occurrences  at  the  caesura. 


72  Regular  Sandhi  combination 

Instances  of  exceptional  hiatus  or  combination  at  the  caesura  are 
separately  recorded  in  the  lists  that  follow.  Instances  of  combination 
at  the  caesura  by  ordinary  rules  are  given  in  Ch.  vm  below. 

The  only  probable  case  of  Sandhi  combination  at  the  end  of  the 
verse  is  in  *ix  113  7cd  : 

tdsmin  mdrti  dhehi  pavamdn   |  amfte  lokd  dksite 
Here  the  two  dimeter  verses  of  epic  Anustubh  are  regarded  as  forming 
one  verse  of   16  syllables.     Somewhat  similarly  we  find  combination 
in  viii  13  15cd  (Dimeter  Usnih),  but  these  verses  may  be  regarded  as 
forming  a  single  trimeter  verse. 

Other  cases  in  which  metrical  difficulties  would  be  removed  by  the 
hypothesis  of  Sandhi  combination  are  i  110  9ab,  *164  24cd,  v  7  7cd, 
vi  27  5ab,  ix  97  43bc. 

120.  Final  -a,  -a  are  regularly  combined  with  an  initial  vowel 
or  diphthong  following:  and  final  -i  -%  -u  -u  are  regularly  combined 
with  similar  vowels,  that  is  -i  or  -I  with  either  -i  or  -I,  and  -u  or 
-u  with  either  -u  or  -u. 

But  many  monosyllables  are  uncombined,  especially  nd  'as/ 
sd,  and  u  or  u:  and  less  regularly  prd,  d,  sma  and  other  mono- 
syllables in  -*  or  -u. 

Duals  in  -a,  -%,  -u  are  also  regularly  uncombined. 

There  appears  to  be  no  instance  of  the  combination  of  the  particle 
u  or  u  with  a  vowel  following  :  the  writing  iim  iti  in  the  Pada-patha 
text  seems  to  assert  the  principle  that  the  long  vowel  is  uncombinable. 
Similarly  such  forms  as  6,  pro,  mo  (where  the  Pada-patha  has  6  iti,  pro 
iti,  mo  iti)  are  never  combined  with  a  vowel  following  :  it  is  occasion- 
ally necessary  to  restore  for  them  d  it,  prd  u,  md  u,  etc.,  with  hiatus 
before  it. 

The  combination  of  nd  '  as,'  and  sd  '  he '  is  comparatively  rare,  and 
the  instances  are  therefore  given  as  exceptions  in  §  122.  The  readings 
sdh,  so,  sd  in  the  Samhita  text  seem  all  to  result  from  later  theories  : 
they  are  often  used  even  when  there  is  really  combination,  as  in 
v  4  6d. 

In  the  cases  of  the  other  words  in  -a,  -a  named  above,  and  also  of 
evd,  it  appears  sufficient  to  note  the  instances  of  hiatus  in  the  general 
lists,  combination  being  on  the  whole  more  common.  Hiatus  is  some- 
times denoted  in  the  Samhita  text  by  the  sign  m,  as  savdyam  i  113  lc, 
sdsadandm  i  123  10a,  evdm  v  6  10a. 

Duals  in  -a  usually  appear  in  the  text  as  ending  in  -dv,  but  -a 
stands  before  u,  and  at  the  end  of  odd  verses  combination  appears  in 
the  text. 

Duals  in  -I,  -u  are  usually  written  in  the  Samhita  text  with  hiatus ; 
in  the  Pada-patha  text  as  in  the  example  prdcl  iti  prdci,  indicating 
that  the  final  vo\vel  is  not  capable  of  combination. 

Nevertheless  there  are  many  instances  of  the  combination  of  duals 
in  -a,  and  some  of  duals  in  -%\  see  §  128.  Combination  of  duals  in  -a 
is  usually  given   correctly  in  the   Samhita  text,  but  combination  of 


Hiatus  after  -a  73 

duals  in  -I  is  more  often  ignored,  no  doubt  as  a  result  of  the  later 
theory  indicated  by  the  Pada-patha  reading. 

Locatives  in  -a  are  frequently  found  before  consonants  within  the 
verse,  but  there  are  only  four  cases  of  combination  with  a  following 
vowel,  namely  in  vi  12  2b,  *viii  91  lb,  *x  101  lib  (text  -a),  and 
vii  39  3b  (text  -av).  The  text  also  gives  -a  before  u-  (Lanman,  Noun- 
Inflection  in  the  Veda,  p.  386):  but  in  these  cases  it  would  seem  right 
to  restore  -av  rather  than  postulate  hiatus. 

The  compound  which  appears  as  saptarsi  in  the  Samhita  text  has  in 
the  Rigveda  the  value  saptarsi,  according  to  rule. 

It  is  evident  that  particles  such  as  %m  and  id  are  frequently 
used  to  prevent  hiatus.  Thus  Professor  H.  Oldenberg  points  out 
[Prolegomena,  p.  435,  Note),  that  final  vowels  are  combined  with  xm 
59  times  when  a  vowel  follows,  whilst  there  is  only  one  occurrence  in 
which  a  consonant  follows.  Again  though  evd  is  often  used  with 
hiatus,  evd  id  is  never  found  with  hiatus,  but  the  combination  eved  is 
found,  most  usually  when  a  vowel  follows.  Whether  these  particles 
were  so  used  by  the  poets  themselves,  or  are  due  to  reciters  and 
editors,  we  have  no  means  of  determining,  and  it  is  therefore  reason- 
able to  accept  the  text  as  it  stands. 

For  the  quantity  of  final  vowels  in  such  words  as  evd,  adyd,  see  the 
chapter  on  '  Quantitative  Restoration.' 

121.  Hiatus  is  found  after  -a  in  the  following  passages,  combination 
being  eight  times  as  frequent : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse  :    i  27  3a1,  30  3b  9a,  40  3a2  8d3,  41  7b,  74  lb, 

79  10b,  80  9d,  105  9c  10a,  120  5c2,  127  3g3  8e,  129  lc2  4d  5c  9e, 
176  5c;        ii  5  7c1,  6  6a,  41  8a3;        iii  13  la,  41  8b,  51  12b2,  53  13b; 

iv  31  13c;  v  6  4b,  7  lb1  7a,  9  3b  5a,  16  lb,  17  Id,  18  lb,  25  8b, 
33  7a,  35  8a,  50  2b1,  51  5c,  65  5a,  67  lc  5a,  70  4a;  vi  14  Id  5c, 
16  3b  42b,  44  6c;         vii  14  Id,  66  lib1;         viii  1  21a,  4  13a,  16  4a, 

18  21a,  19  11a,  23  23a,  24  lb  25a,  27  7d4,  40  9d,  43  lie,  44  27c, 
46  19b  28d2,  52  9b,  61  3b  bis  7d  14b,  62  la2,  66  9a  9b  12b,  67  4b, 
68  17b4,  69  lb  8a2  9d  18a,  70  12a,  71  14a,  72  7a,  74  7d,  75  8b,  78  7b, 

80  5a,  81  7a,  82  3a,  83  7a,  89  3b,  *91  5c,  92  5a2  6b,  95  2c,  98  10a, 
101  5a2,  103  10b;  ix  *5  lib,  11  lb,  24  3b,  29  la2  lb,  55  3b,  58  lb, 
59  2b,  61  19b,  63  22a,  98  2b  5d,  101  13a;  x  20  8a1,  22  7b  8c, 
26  4dJ  8c,  *59  10a,  *85  41c1,  *86  2c3,  *90  10b1  *13cS  93  12d  13d4, 
*97  10c2,  *103  13a24,  105  8b,  126  2b,  134  lb,  *166  5e,  185  2b3.  In 
verses  of  four  syllables  :  viii  12  31d  =  32d  =  33d2,  46  18e2 ;    ix  102  8d2. 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse,  at  the  caesura:  i  31  8c,  33  la  13c,  52  10a, 
61  lc,  62  3a,  77  la,  89  8b,  91  22c,  114  2a,  116  18b,  117  la  8b  11a  21a 
22a,  119  9b,  120  4b,  128  4b,  133  7f,  *170  5d,  173  12a,  174  7b,  177  5a, 
180  2a,  181  9a,  190  5a;        ii  4  8a,  11  12a,  14  5d  6b,  18  7a,  19  la  7a; 

iii  32  4c ;       iv  4  lb,  5  lb,  16  2a,  23  7c5,  28  5b,  51  3b ;       v  33  3a  4b, 

37  2c,  54  lOd ;        vi  3  2b,  6  6c,  12  3a,  13  5d,  15  3a  3b,  16  46b,  20  la 

4c  4d3,  21  12d,  24  6b,  31  3a  4b,  33  2a  3a  4a  5a,  36  4c,  47  4d,  48  13a; 

vii  1  20c,  4  lb1  8a,  6  3d,  14  2c,  21  4a,  22  4b,  28  la  4a,  32  10c,  *33 

10c,  41  6a,  52  2c,  90  Id,  98  3c;         viii  1  3c  8c,  4  13c,  10  4c,  18  15c1, 

19  26a,  22  15b,  25  3c,  96  17c;  ix   76  4c,  88  4d;  x  *10  13a, 


74  Words  not  combined 

*12  3a  *6a5  *8c5,  *13  5c,  32  Id,  40  lid,  *42  10a,  49  2b1,  61  3d  14a  14c, 
73  9a  10a,  74  4a,  *88  12c,  92  7c,  99  lOd,  115  5b,  *120  7b,  *124  5d. 

(c)  in  Trimeter  verse  elsewhere :  i  57  3c,  61  5b  8b  8d3  15c2,  62  Id 
3a1  4b,  63  5a  6a,  79  2a,  104  4a,  115  lb,  120  3c2,  122  4d  13c4,  127  3f3, 
129  6a,  141  12a4,  149  3c4,  155  lb1,  167  la,  168  3a4  9c,  174  2c  5b  6a4 
7a,  180  2d,  186  10a2,  190  6a24;  ii  4  6c4,  17  8b,  19  3b2,  20  4d,  27  6c, 
35  6a,  38  9a  9c3;  iii  5  2a2,  32  16b3;  iv  2  18d,  3  11a,  6  2c,  16  7c2  20b, 
19  7a2,  21  7d2,  38  5d\  40  3d;  v  4  4a,  12  la2,  33  lb  10c,  41  3d2  5a4 
9b4  12d  14b1  14c4  19d,  45  9a4;  vi  4  4b,  10  4b4,  18  5c,  20  la  6c2, 
21  9a2,  24  9b2,  34  Id4,  37  2a2  2a,  47  2b,  49  7a4  8c4,  63  2a  2d3  3d6,  66  3b1, 
67  8c4,  72  3c2;  vii  1  3a24  7c  22b4,  3  Id4,  5  la2,  13  la2,  22  lb  4a, 
25  la,  *33  10c,  36  la,  40  Id,  42  |6b,  46  lb4,  59  lc,  61  3a2,  79  4d6, 
87  lb2,  97  9b;  viii  4  4a,  19  23b1  35c,  20  18a1,  22  2a4,  23  24c,  24  15c3, 
70  10c,  96  10b2;  ix  81  la,  89  la2,  91  5b24,  92  5a,  96  22a2;  x  *10  6a 
*13a3,  *15  13a1,  *17  9c4,  22  11a4,  23  7b1,  29  5a2,  *32  7b2,  40  8d4,  49  7b2, 
50  la  lb4  6d  7d,  *53  4c4,  61  24d'  25a,  *88  9a  *14c,  93  11a,  *94  5a  *8c, 
*95  10d2,  96  9d,  105  6a2  6a4,  *108  5a6,  115  4a,  *121  4a  *4c,  133  7c4, 
148  5b. 

1  ca.  *  prd.  3  nd  negative.  4  the  hiatus  is  at  the  end  of  the 

prior  element  of  a  compound.  5  dtra  or  ydtra.         8  augment  with  hiatus. 

122.  Combination  of  nd  '  as,'  sd  l  he '  is  rare. 

nd  *  as '  is  found  with  hiatus  about  60  times  :  with  combination 
only  in  i  104  5b,  x  46  5d,  106  7c,  no  one  of  the  instances  being  quite 
certain. 

sd  'he'  is  found  with  hiatus  about  150  times:  with  combination 
about  50  times,  chiefly  in  hymns  of  the  normal  and  cretic  period,  as 
follows : 

(a)   in  Dimeter  verse:    i  14  lie,  16  5a  9a,  26  lc  ;         iii  10  3c; 

iv  8  4a,  37  6a;  vii  15  6a;  viii  43  9b;  x  *86  16a  *16c  *17a 
*17c,  *97  23c. 

(6)  in  Trimeter  verse  :  i  31  15d,  32  15c,  102  9c,  156  2d;  ii  9  6a, 
12  5a  5c,  13  2d  3d  4d,  15  6a,  17  6a,  18  2a,  22  lg  2g  3g,  24  la  Id, 
35  7c  10b  13c,  37  2b;      iii  4  2c  10c,  31  11a,  39  2d,  55  17b;      iv  4  7a; 

v  4  6d ;  vii  1  14a  15a,  40  3a;  viii  66  8c ;  ix  74  2c  7c  ;  x  2  3c, 
*27  la,  44  5c,  *53  la,  68  9a. 

123.  Hiatus  after  -a  occurs  in  the  following  passages,  combination 
being  again  eight  times  as  frequent : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse  :  i  8  la1,  30  17a1  21b1,  38  6a2,  120  6c1,  127 
6c13  lOg,  129  7ex  9b,  133  6c;  ii  41  17b;  iii  13  lb4;  iv  52  2a, 
*57  7b;       v  6  10a5,  25  9a5,  *51   15c,  53  14b,  61  5a6,  75  2b,  86  6a5; 

vi  16  27a3  42b11,  46  5dx ;  vii  59  5a1 ;  viii  1  23a1,  5  29b,  7  33a1, 
9  13a7,  10  5a7,  16  7a,  17  lb4,  20  17c,  22  la1,  33  13a1  13d8  15a7,  34  la1 
lib4,  46  10b  29b,  61  9b9  17a7,  65  5c1,  70  12d4,  98  4a1;  ix  29  6a1, 
108  Ud1;        x  21  la1,  26  Id  9b,  *60  7a,  105  4a  lib  lie,  *145  3a. 

(6)  in  Trimeter  verse,  at  the  caesura :  i  53  3c10  5d  8b,  61  4b, 
62  8c,  66  7a,  77  lb,  94  8c11,  117  lb,  120  2b,  129  5a4,  *162  13c, 
167  10a7,  169  3c12,  173  4a  11a12,  174  la,  178  2a,  180  7c12  8a12,  183  2d, 


Hiatus  after  -a  75 

184  2c3 14,  186  6c,  190  3c  ;  ii  20  3a  7a,  24  3b  ;  iii  54  12b ;  iv  2 
lid13,  10  la7  5a,  16  18b,  34  5a11,  35  3b4,  40  2d;  v  3  9d,  11  5b, 
31  12c,  34  lb,  44  3d,  45  6b  7d,  46  4d,  51  lie,  53  9a;  vi  13  3d,  20  3b, 
21  9b13,  25  lb  7b,  36  5b8,  41  5a,  49  15c,  50  5b,  61  13b,  64  5a6,  *75  I8d; 

vii  3  7a,  21  6a,  34  5a11,  60  lc,  70  4b  7a,  87  4b8,  93  7d  8b  ;  viii  4  20c, 
19  26c,  20  2c7  24c11,  35  2b,  *48  14b,  96  20a  21a,  *100  lie;  ix  86 
44b  45a,  97  4a11,  107  2c,  109  la4;  x   1  7c14,  *15  4c11,  23  5b,  55  8d, 

64  5a9,  73  7d,  74  6b,  *95  16a,  99  3a,  105  4b,  *117  7c,  *121  2c,  132  4d 
6a,  139  3b,  148  4a8. 

(c)   in   Trimeter   verse   elsewhere:    i   48   7c   16c,   58  9c4,   60  4b, 

61  16c1,  62  8d,  69  9a,  77  la6  5a6,  87  4c,  104  lc10  5a  6c2,  108  4d', 
113  Hd1,  120  6b,  127  6f12,  130  la1,  133  6b,  140  13c,  173  4a,  174  8a, 

185  4a,  186  6a,  189  4d2;      ii  13  10a,  17  lb,  18  4c1,  19  3d ;       iii  6  6c15; 
iv    2   18b8,   3    13b2,    16    la,    19    6c,    33    10a,    38    6aia   8a12    9a12, 

40  3a12,  43  4b1;  v  29  15b,  41  16b3  16c3,  45  2d ;  vi  4  4b,  12  5a12, 
19  9b1,  20  8d,  21  8d*  3,  23  4a,  24  5d  9a,  48  17c2,  64  5a6,  66  3d6  6c'2  6d', 
67  6d\  *75  3d  ;  vii  1  7a4,  4  6d2,  6  7d\  8  Id1,  22  6c2,  32  14c,  34  la  4a11, 
39  5a1,  40  la1  3d  4b  6a2,  42  6a5,  69  3a,  71  3d1 ;  viii  1  16c,  70  12c4, 
96  9d4,  101  13c,  103  13a3;  ix  71  6c1 ;  x  5  t5d,  30  2b14,  49  10b 
lie,  50  2d9,  61  9c  14d  18c,  65  15b,  *94  10b,  *95  4a6,  *101  3b11  *7a", 
115  7a5,  *129  5d,  132  4d,  144  5b1. 

1  d.        2  md.        3  at  end  of  the  prior  element  of  a  compound.         4  imperative 
in  -a  (-a).  5  evd  (evd).  6  kd,  yd,  sd.  7  adya  (adyd).  8  plural 

in  -a  (-a)  from  stems  in  -an,  -man  or  -van.  9  vd.  10  gerund  in  -yd  (-ya). 

11  2  pers.  plural  in  -td  (-ta).  12  smd  (sma).  13  aorist  imperative  in  -sva  (sva). 
14  dchd  (dcha).  15  dthd  (dtha).     For  the  true  value  of  the  final  vowels  of 

variant  quantity  see  below,  §§  158-163. 

124.  After  final  -i,  -l,  -u,  -u  before  similar  vowels  combination  and 
hiatus  are  more  evenly  balanced.  After  monosyllables  hiatus  is  regular, 
particularly  after  vi  as  in  x  32  2a,  and  hi  as  in  i  102  5d.  So  nU  u 
should  probably  be  restored  in  i  64  15a,  120  2c,  iv  16  21a,  v  10  6a, 
16  5a,  17  5a,  52  15a,  74  6c,  vi  6S  8a,  vii  62  6a,  93  6c,  100  la. 
Combination  is  rare ;  the  examples  are  viva  *vii  55  2c,  *x  86  7d,  nltah 
*x  161  2b,  vlddm  vi  9  6b,  him  ii  30  3c. 

On  the  other  hand  longer  words,  and  compounds  beginning  with  su-, 
are  generally  combined.     The  exceptions  are  as  follows  : 

(a)    in  Dimeter  verse:    iv  47  2c,  57   Id;         vi  *16  47c,  44  5a; 
viii  21  3a,  24  22a,  46  32d,  47  If1  2f'  3f l  (in  refrain),  49  6d,  53  3d, 

62  5b,  *91  5b,  93  27a;         ix  *5  8b,  13  7a,  21  la,  40  4b. 

(6)    in   Trimeter  verse,   at   the   caesura:    i    36    lc1,    53    11a,    112 

Id  =  2d  =  3d,  122  14d,  127  6b,  169  6a,  171  6a,  173  5a;         ii  34  12b; 

iii  57  5b;      *iv  18  4d;      v  58  3a,  *83  7d ;      vi  5  6a,  10  7a,  21  8a, 

47  9c;         vii  28  3a,  *35  10b;         ix   109  18a;         x  50  3d,  *88  4c, 

110  3d. 

(c)  in  Trimeter  verse  elsewhere:  i  52  7b,  70  5b1,  134  5b;     ii  17  8c; 

iii  55  12c;  v  29  6c,  49  5b1;  vi9  7c7d;  vii  1  3b1,  29  3a1,  *49 
4b,  58  6b1,  65  la1,  66  12b1,  68  9a1;  viii  96  19d;  ix  97  49d;  x  61 
26b1,  116  7d,  *169  la. 

1  compounds  beginning  with  su-. 


76  Combination  of  semivowels 

125.  Before  dissimilar  vowels  final  -i  -i  -u  -u  are  regularly  used 
with  hiatus  :  but  disyllabic  prepositions  followed  by  the  augmented 
tenses  of  the  verbs  to  which  they  belong,  as  ddhy  atisthan,  are  used 
freely  in  combination  from  the  normal  period  onwards.  Other  combin- 
ations in  which  a  disyllable  is  the  first  element  are  also  fairly  common, 
so  that  the  phonetic  type,  not  the  grammatical  connection,  appears  to 
be  the  essential  condition. 

Disyllabic  prepositions  are  combined  with  an  augmented  form  of  a 
verb  following  as  below  : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse:  i  11  6b,  *23  23a,  49  2b,  80  9c,  135  6d, 
*191  5a;  *v  40  9c;  viii  69  lid  ;  ix  26  2a,  47  lb,  99  4b, 
*113  3c;       x  *9  9a,  *72  3c  *5c,  *85  38a,  *90  Id  *5c,  *135  2c,  *159  Id. 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse:  i  32  8c  12b,  33  10b,  113  7a,  116  15d  17c, 
117  8d,  118  7d,  124  3a,  146  4c,  *161  12a,  *163  2b  *9d,  *164  25b, 
168  9d,   182  7b;         ii  12   lb  lib,  17  2d  4b;         iii  26  8d,  51    lb; 

*iv  18  3a  *lla,  *58  4b ;  v  11  6b,  30  12d  *15b,  31  5d  ;  vi  38  3b, 
47  25b;       vii  76  4c,  78  3a,  *103  3a;       viii  *59  6d,  96  16c,  *100  5c; 

ix  68  8b,  69  4c,  80  2a,  86  8c  17c,  110  6b;  x  4  6b,  8  8b,  *13  3a  *5b, 
43  6a,  *51  2b,  68  8a,  *71  3b,  *81  4d,  *109  5c,  *121  6b  *8a,  123  2d  6b, 
*139  4c,  *157  5b. 

Words  consisting  of  two  short  syllables  are  also  found  in  combination 
as  below  : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse:  i  50  5a3  5b3,  80  12c;  v  19  la,  52  6c, 
73  3c;  vii  81  la;  viii  7  24c,  43  24b1 ;  ix  6  5c1,  13  lb1,  17  3a1, 
45  4a  5b1,  *67  31a  *32a,  101  16d,  106  lib1;  x  *18  lid,  *86  8d  *llc 
*22c1,  *87  24a  *25a,  118  8b,  *119  5b,  *141  lb3,  *145  4a,  *146  6b1, 
*179  Id. 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse:  i  34  Id1,  79  5c1,  116  12c2,  118  3c,  120  8a, 
122   12b,    139   9a2,   156   2d,   *161   8a,    *162   2d  *7c,   *179    Id   *3d ; 

ii  3  lb3,  15  9a1,  26  lb,  38  3c1  5d ;  iii  9  4c,  31  4c,  58  3c ;  iv  4  lib, 
*58  10a ;  v  28  lb3,  76  2d ;  vi  27  5b1  8c1 ;  vii  *33  la4,  65  3b1, 
83  8c4,  *104  2a;  viii  *1  34a;  ix  72  3c,  80  3c3,  97  10c  ;  x  1  4c, 
*27  6d,  *52  3b,  *53  6a,  *87  15b3*17d3,  *88  13d1  *16c3,  89  13a,  *98  lid, 
*109  2c1,  *116  4c,  123  7b3.  *124  4d,  *128  Id1  *3b  *6c3,  *129  7c1, 
*130  7d\  *142  lb,  *157  5a3. 

Combination  of  words  other  than  those  which  consist  of  two  short 
syllables  is  comparatively  rare,  except  in  the  compounds  rtvij,  gdvyuti, 
svdhd  and  svid,  in  which  it  is  regular. 

Combination  is  found  exceptionally  as  follows  : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse:  *i  191  3d  (ni) ;  v  *51  14c  and  *15a 
(svasti)-,       *vii  55  5d  (sdstu);       viii  16  lib  (svasti);       ix  15  la  (ydti); 

x  134  le  If  in  refrain  verses  (janitri),  *146  4b  (ddru). 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse  :  *ii  32  4c  (sivyatu) ;  viii  51  4c  (tu),  90  5c 
(Jiamsi)',  ix  96  4b  (svastdye)  ;  x  *14  lid  (svasti),  61  13a  (nu), 
*95  4b  (vdsti),  99  12c  (svastim),  110  lie  (pradis'irtdsya,  not  pradisy 
rtdsya  as  in  the  text),  *121  8c  (devesu),  *142  lb  (asti).  For  i  110  9 
see  §  116  above. 

On  the  other  hand  sudhd  occurs  in  iii  32  15a. 

1  prior  element  of  compound.  2  dadhydc.  3  pratydc.  *  svitydc. 


Abhinihita  Sandhi  77 

126.  Words  ending  in  -ah,  -ey  -o  lose  their  final  element 
before  an  initial  vowel  following,  and  are  therefore  all  alike  treated 
as  ending  in  -a  with  hiatus :  and  similarly  words  ending  in  ~ai 
and  -au  are  treated  as  ending  in  -a.  But  duals  both  of  nouns 
and  of  verbs  ending  in  -e,  and  the  locative  tu4  (tve),  are  unaltered. 

These  rules  are  so  far  in  general  agreement  with  those  of  classical 
Sanskrit.  The  unalterable  character  of  the  dual  endings,  and  of  tue 
is  recognised  in  the  Pada-patha  text  by  the  addition  iti :  as  to  asme 
yusmd  see  §  170. 

127.  According  to  the  rules  of  classical  Sanskrit,  final  -ah 
becomes  -o,  and  final  -e  is  unaltered,  if  the  next  word  begins  with 
a-,  but  the  initial  a-  is  lost.  This  result  is  comparatively  rare  in 
the  Rigveda  proper,  but  is  occasionally  found  in  all  parts  of  it :  in 
the  popular  Rigveda  it  is  considerably  more  common.  As  many 
of  the  instances  are  found  at  the  caesura,  it  seems  that  the  loss  of 
the  initial  vowel  was  not  regarded  by  the  poets  as  equivalent  to 
combination  of  the  syllables. 

After  -ah  and  -e  initial  a-  is  lost  as  follows  : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse:  i  79  11a1,  81  le;         v  61  2a;         vii  66  5c; 
viii  2  34b  40c,  27  22d,  50  5b ;     ix  9  4b,  59  4b ;     *x  72  4c,  *85  17d, 

*90  3c  *4b  *12a,  126  3a,  *127  lc,  *145  6a1,  *161  5d\  *166  3a  *4d, 
*190  lb.  At  the  beginning  of  a  verse  of  four  syllables  viii  13  15d : 
see  above  §  1 1 9. 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse,  at  the  caesura:  i  59  2c,  70  4b,  118  7a1, 
168  9c,  186  8c,  190  3d;       iii  59  2d ;       ivll2d;       vii  1  19b1,  61  3d ; 

x  61  7c,  89  13d,  *103  lc. 

(c)  in  Trimeter  verse,  elsewhere:  i  *24  8c1,  30  16d,  33  13b,  51  3a 
5a,  52  9d,  53  2c,  59  3b1,  85  7a1,  89  6c,  103  7b,  122  la,  167  2a, 
186  11a;  ii  23  16b;  *iii  29  3d1 ;  iv  16  18a,  55  Id ;  v  29  10b1, 
30  3d1  10a,  31  3d,  61  9a1;         vi  9  2b1,  22  4d,  44  19b,  47  22b,  50  10c  ; 

vii  18  7c,  *33  lib,  57  5c,  71  5a;  viii  *58  lc  *3c1,  96  20c;  ix  86 
23d;  x  7  5c,  43  2c,  49  5c1,  56  3d,  63  6c,  75  2a1,  79  6c1,  92  lib, 
*95  6d,  99  7c  7d,  *108  5b,  116  6b. 

The  Saihhita  text  usually  shews  this  combination  correctly  where  it 
occurs,  and  also  incorrectly  at  the  end  of  odd  verses. 

1  forms  in  -e. 

128.  Duals  in  -a,  -I,  -e  are  very  frequently  combined  with 
following  iva:  the  instances  are  given  in  the  next  section.  In 
addition  the  following  examples  of  combination  of  duals  are  found, 
chiefly  in  the  normal  and  cretic  periods : 

(i)     Combination  of  duals  in  -a  : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse  :  i  47  9a  ;  iii  12  4b  ;  v  73  6d ;  viii  5  2c 
16c,  8  6c,  22  5d,  31  9b,  35  22c,  38  2b;         *x  85  9b,  *U1  4b. 


78  Combination  with  iva 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse:  i  34  9d,  102  2c,  108  3d,  110  8d,  112  Id, 
116  3a  8c  9a  10a  14b  19c,  117  Id  lid  12d  13d  18b,  118  9b,  119  2d, 
152  3b,  *161  7b,  182  4d,  183  2b  3c  5d ;         ii  16  5c,  31  la,  39  8c; 

iv  2  4b,  21  9a,  44  3d  4b;  v  43  8c,  46  3a,  62  5c  5d  bis  6b,  63  lc, 
76  lc  2b  bis  3d  4b;  vi  49  5c,  68  lib;  vii  9  5c,  44  la,  63  5d, 
64  2c,  71  4c,  72  5a,  83  Id  2d  3d;         viii  22  10c  12a,  57  4b,  86  3a; 

x  22  5a,  39  3b  10a,  41  2a,  *52  2c,  64  5b,  73  3d,  *87  3a,  106  lib, 
*125  lc*ld,  *128  7c,  131  5a. 

(ii)  Combination  of  duals  in  -i  with  following  i-  is  found  in 
i  121  8a,  177  4d,  iv  56  la,  vii  87  2c,  90  3a,  the  combination  being 
correctly  given  in  the  text  in  the  last  two  instances.  Combination 
with  dissimilar  vowels  following  appears  to  be  found  also,  namely 
prdcl  'dhvard  in  iii  6  10c,  and  rodasl  'bhe  (for  rodasl  ubhe)  in  i  33  9a, 
iii  34  Id,  v  31  6c,  vi  30  Id.  There  is  no  instance  of  the  combination 
of  a  dual  in  -u. 

(iii)  Combination  of  duals  in  -e  is  very  rare ;  there  is  perhaps  an 
instance  in  vii  72  3c. 

(iv)  In  the  dvandva  duals  as  indrdgni,  ndktosdsd,  combination  is 
the  more  usual :  but  the  following  examples  of  hiatus  are  found  : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse :  v  86  la  4b  6a,  vi  59  2b  5a  6a  8a  9a,  60  4c 
5b  7a,  viii  40  la  3b. 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse,  at  the  caesura :  vi  60  13a. 

(c)  in  Trimeter  verse  elsewhere :  vii  93  lb  3d  4c,  x  65  2a. 

129.  The  particle  iva  is  so  frequently  found  in  combination 
with  preceding  words,  without  regard  to  the  form  of  the  ending, 
that  the  simplest  explanation  is  the  presence  of  the  parallel  form 
va,  regularly  used  in  Pali  and  in  the  verses  of  Buddhist  Sanskrit. 
As  such,  the  occurrences  have  already  been  taken  account  of 
amongst  the  forms  which  indicate  late  date.  As  however  they 
may  also  be  regarded  as  examples  of  a  peculiar  form  of  Sandhi,  it 
will  be  well  to  give  the  list  here. 

(i)     Duals  in  -a  -I  -e  are  combined  with  iva  following : 

(a)  in  Dimeter  verse:  i  28  7c1;  iv  32  23a2;  v  64  lc,  74  9d, 
86  5d;         viii  5  21c,  34  9b,  73  4b. 

(b)  in  Trimeter  verse  :    i  166  lc2  Id2,  173  4d,  184  3a2  3d,  185  Id ; 
ii  3  6b2,  39  21  times;         iii  6  10c,  30  4d2,  58  2b ;         iv  41  5b  5c 

7d;      V18  3C1;      vii  69  6a,  *104  6d';      viii  26  15c,  35  7a  7b;      ix  88 
3b;       x  4  6a,  40  2c  3a  3d  4a,  *59  lb,  106  27  times. 

1  duals  in  -?.  2  duals  in  -e. 

(ii)     Words  ending  in  -ah,  -ah,  -ih,  -Ih,  -uh,  -eh,  -aih  appear  to  be 

combined  with  iva  following  in  i  141  lie,  175  6b  :         ii  6  7c,  *43  2b; 

iii  36  6b;      v  7  8b,  54  6b  6d;      vi  46  4a,  48  18a,  *75  14a;      vii  56 

8b;        viii  19  14d,  35  5a,  *91  3c;        ix  96  15d;       x  62  9b,  69  5c  6c, 

*84  2a,  *97  10b,  *146  2c,  *149  4a  *4c,  *166  2b,  *173  2b  *2c. 


Irregular  Sandhi  79 

Words  ending  in  -am,  -im,  -um  appear  to  be  combined  with  iva 
following  in  *i  97  8a  ;  ii  13  4b ;  *iv  18  5a ;  vi  19  3c  ;  vii  41  6d, 
*59  12c  j       viii  49  4d ;       x  49  6b,  *149  lc. 

130.  The  occurrence  of  Sandhi  combination  in  the  Rigveda 
in  positions  in  which  it  is  not  admissible  by  the  rules  of  classical 
Sanskrit  is  proved  in  the  case  of  duals  (§  128  above).  In  other 
cases  in  which  it  is  suggested  by  the  metre  it  is  not  always 
possible  to  determine  whether  the  irregularity  is  in  the  metre  or 
in  the  combination. 

Probable  instances  of  irregular  combination  are : 

(i)  -ah,  -e  with  following  vowel  other  than  a :  ii  20  8d,  iii  43  5c, 
v  52  14c,  vii  86  4d,  viii  1  26c,  46  28c,  x  *85  40b,  *87  15c,  *90  4a, 
93  lOd,  *166  5d. 

(ii)  final  -ah:  i  177  4a,  ii  20  2b,  iii  30  21c,  iv  34  3d,  x  *51  9a, 
75  3a. 

(iii)    final  -ai,  au :  iii  32  6b,  v  17  3a,  vii  39  3b. 

(iv)  final  -am,  -dm,  -im :  i  14  3b,  *161  8a,  iv  *18  2a,  v  46  2b, 
*51  15a,  vi  17  7b,  48  4d,  vii  19  5c,  x  20  2a,  49  6d,  *114  4a. 

131.  The  distribution  of  the  principal  variations  from  the 
Vedic  rules  of  Sandhi  combination  is  shewn  in  the  table  following. 
The  whole  number  of  variations  is  about  1200 :  the  instances  in 
which  the  rules  are  observed  may  be  estimated  at  ten  times  that 
number.  About  one  half  of  the  variations  are  in  favour  of  hiatus, 
and  one  half  in  favour  of  combination.  Of  those  in  favour  of 
hiatus  two-thirds  are  found  in  the  bardic  period ;  of  those  in 
favour  of  combination  only  a  quarter  are  so  found.  This  result  is 
a  substantial  confirmation  of  the  view  that  the  hymns  of  the 
bardic  period  are  earlier  in  date  than  the  rest  of  the  Rigveda. 

The  history  can  be  pursued  in  more  detail  by  considering  the 
number  of  occurrences  of  each  kind  in  relation  to  the  bulk  of  the 
groups :  except  that  Group  V  contains  so  little  trimeter  verse, 
and  Groups  IV,  VIII,  and  IX  so  little  dimeter  verse  that  no 
comparisons  can  usefully  be  made  in  these  particulars.  It  then 
appears  that  hiatus  is  far  more  common  in  Groups  I — III  than 
elsewhere.  In  Groups  IV  and  V  hiatus  is  only  half  as  common  as 
before,  but  combination  is  unaltered.  In  Group  IX  irregular 
hiatus  hardly  exists;  in  3000  trimeter  verses  there  are  only 
20  examples,  and  of  these  13  are  at  the  caesura:  combination  of 
all  kinds  has  greatly  increased.  In  the  popular  Rigveda  some 
reaction  is  to  be  noticed:  hiatus  is  more  common,  and  combination 


80 


History  of  Sandhi 


of  sd,  of  duals,  and  with  iva  is  rarer;  but  combination  of  final 
-i,  -I,  -u,  -u,  -ah,  -e  is  much  more  common  than  in  Group  IX,  and 
a  close  approximation  to  the  standard  of  classical  Sanskrit  is 
reached. 

In  trimeter  verse  the  occurrences  of  hiatus  at  the  caesura  are 
equally  common  with  the  occurrences  in  all  other  positions  in 
Groups  I  to  VI :  in  Groups  VII  to  IX  they  are  twice  as  common. 

132.  Table  shewing  the  growth  of  Sandhi  combination 
in  the  Rigveda. 


Group 

I 

11 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

Bulk1 

2-3 

3-5 

3-8 

2-7 

1-7 

6 

3  3 

2-8 

3 

4-7 

Exceptional  hiatus 

76 

143 

157 

72 

34 

84 

28 

33 

22 

63 

,,           combination 

16 

38 

41 

27 

15 

78 

43 

30 

113 

134 

Per  cent.2 

17 

21 

21 

27 

31 

48 

59 

48 

85 

68 

Hiatus  after  -a3: 

dimeter  verse 

18 

28 

17 

— 

9 

7 

5 

— 

— 

8 

trimeter  at  caesura 

9 

10 

11 

5 

— 

2 

4 

2 

3 

3 

,,        elsewhere 

11 

18 

14 

7 

— 

5 

1 

1-5 

1-5 

4 

Hiatus  after  a4: 

dimeter  verse 

9 

9 

4 

— 

9 

3 

3 

— 

— 

3 

trimeter  at  caesura 

7 

10 

9 

5 

— 

4 

2 

2 

1 

2 

,,        elsewhere 

8 

7 

11 

6 

— 

3 

1 

3 

•5 

2 

Hiatus  after  -i,  etc.5 

3 

1 

2 

3 

2 

2 

1 

2 

2 

2 

Combination  : 

sd 

5 

1 

0 

1 

1 

2-5 

2 

1 

4 

2 

-i,  etc.6 

3 

3 

2 

3 

2 

5 

4 

2 

7 

18 

-ah,  -e7 

1 

2 

3-5 

2 

2 

1-5 

2 

3 

3 

5 

duals 

2 

2 

1-5 

3 

3 

2-5 

4 

4 

4 

2 

iva8 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

1 

1 

2 

20 

4 

1  The  unit  of  bulk  in  this  line  consists  of  1000  trimeter  verses  =  1500  dimeter 
verses.  No  entries  are  made  in  the  table  below  for  dimeter  and  trimeter  verses 
separately  in  those  groups  in  which  the  bulk  of  tbe  kind  in  question  is  less  than 
the  unit.  2  The  figures  in  this  line  give  the  proportion  of  occurrences  of 

exceptional  combination  in  each  100  exceptional  instances  of  the  two  kinds  taken 
together.  3  From  this  point  all  the  figures  are  proportionately  reduced  so  as 

to  shew  the  number  of  occurrences  in  each  unit  of  bulk.  4  Including  the 

occurrences  of  hiatus  in  dvandva  duals.  5  Hiatus  after  -i,  -i,  -u,  -ft  before  similar 
vowels.  6  Combination  of  -i,  -I,  -u,  -u  with  dissimilar  vowels.  7  Loss  of 

initial  a-  after  -ah  and  -e.  8  Combination  of  iva  with  duals  and  other  words. 

The  high  proportion  in  Group  IX  is  largely  explained  by  the  numerous  occurrences 
in  the  two  hymns  ii  39  and  x  106 :  but  even  apart  from  these  hymns  there  are 
seven  occurrences  in  each  unit  of  bulk. 


CHAPTER  V. 

SYLLABIC  RESTORATION. 

133.  In  the  present  chapter  it  is  proposed  to  deal  with  all 
the  instances  in  which  it  seems  desirable  to  correct  the  Sarhhita 
text  so  as  to  alter  the  number  of  syllables  in  a  word.  In  the 
great  majority  of  cases  the  result  is  to  restore  hiatus  within  the 
word,  as  in  the  last  chapter  the  result  was  to  restore  hiatus  at 
the  end  of  the  word  or  prior  element  of  the  compound.  The 
historical  problem  under  investigation  in  the  two  chapters  is 
therefore  essentially  the  same:  and  the  Sanskrit  Grammar  has 
reason  when  it  treats  of  the  combination  of  a  stem  with  a  case  or 
personal  termination  as  a  problem  of '  Sandhi.'  As  however  the 
treatment  of  the  interior  structure  of  words  involves  many  diffi- 
culties and  complications,  it  has  seemed  better  to  deal  first  with 
the  simpler  problem  of  the  combination  of  words,  and  thus  to 
have  a  starting-point  for  the  further  enquiry.  Now  that  we 
have  found  that  the  Vedic  poems  admit  every  kind  of  hiatus, 
occasionally  after  -a  -a  and  between  similar  vowels,  and  regularly 
after  the  semivowels  before  dissimilar  vowels,  at  the  end  of  words, 
we  shall  be  prepared  to  find  similar  phenomena  within  words:  but 
it  must  not  be  expected  that  the  historical  developement  will  be 
precisely  the  same.  We  shall  endeavour  first  to  ascertain  and 
group  the  facts,  as  to  which  the  margin  of  doubt  is  comparatively 
small,  and  afterwards  to  interpret  them  as  far  as  possible  in  the 
light  of  our  general  view  of  the  history  of  the  Rigveda  (§§  153, 154). 

134.     Syllabic  restoration  appears  to  be  justified  as  follows: — 

(i)  When  the  proposed  restoration  is  more  suitable  to  the 
metre  in  a  majority  of  the  occurrences  of  the  particular  word  or 
form,  as 

6 


82  Syllabic  restoration 

(a)  in  all  words  containing  y  or  v  followed  by  a  vowel  with 
grave  accent :  as  suar  for  svdr,  ddhie  for  ddhye : 

(b)  in  many  nouns  having  the  noun-suffix  -ya  after  a  light 
syllable,  as  ytijia :  and  generally  in  nouns  having  the  same  suffix 
after  a  heavy  syllable,  as  sdria : 

(c)  in  the  pronoun  of  the  second  person,  in  the  forms  tudm, 
tudm,  tud,  tui,  and  tud-  in  composition  : 

(d)  in  the  instrumental  singular  and  gen.  loc.  dual  of  -i  stems, 
as  sdmid,  hdrioh : 

(e)  in  the  declension  of  nouns  in  -man  and  -van  :  as  dhdmand 
(text  dhdmnd) :  and 

(/)  in  a  few  isolated  words  and  forms:  as  bhadsvat  (text 
bhdsvat),  dadsvat  (text  ddsvat),  trayidhd  (text  tredhd),  dayisnd 
(text  desnd),  prdyistha  (text  prdstha),  frdyini  (text  sreni). 

(ii)  When  the  proposed  restoration  is  more  suitable  to  the 
metre  in  a  substantial  minority  of  the  occurrences,  so  that  it  is 
unlikely  that  the  occasions  can  be  explained  as  chance  irregu- 
larities of  metre.     Such  cases  are 

(a)  non- thematic  flexional  forms  of  monosyllabic  nouns  and 
verbs  and  their  compounds,  as  ksdam,  paantu,  ndyisi  (text  nfei), 
and  the  corresponding  forms  with  superlative  and  other  suffixes, 
as  jydyistha  (text  jyestha),  bhads,  vdata : 

(b)  the  ending  -aam  (text  -dm)  in  the  genitive  plural  of  all 
declensions : 

(c)  the  endings  -bhidm,  -bhiah  after  heavy  syllables : 

(d)  numerous  endings  and  suffixes  containing  v  (less  often  y) 
after  heavy  syllables,  as  in  the  words  aiigdhue,  urdhud,  ddsndrtis, 
abhttid,  tvd : 

(e)  the  optative  suffix  -yd,  as  in  asidma : 

(/)   the  noun-endings  -yai,  -yah,  -yam,  as  in  prthividm : 
(g)   a  few  words  in  which  y  v  are  the  second  element  in  an 
initial  consonant-group,  as  diatih,  sudya. 

In  connection  with  these  we  have  to  consider  the  difficult 
question  of  restoration  in  the  suffixes  -ra  and  -na,  as  indara, 
ruda,rd,  mdntara,  cyautand :  and  four-syllable  forms  of  the  words 
ndsatyd,  ddityd,  either  as  ndasatya,  aadityd  or  as  ndsatid,  dditid. 

Syllabic  restoration  is  also  justified  as  a  conjecture  in  words 
and  forms  which  are  not  very  frequent,  if  it  is  suggested  in  one  or 
two  passages  and  if  reasonably  near  analogies  can  be  found  in 


Accented  y  and  v  83 

any  of  the  sections  above :  but  the  application  of  this  principle  is 
a  matter  for  individual  judgment.  In  very  common  words  and 
forms  restoration  is  not  justified  by  an  occasional  opportunity  in 
the  text,  and  it  is  therefore  unnecessary  to  discuss  such  suggestions 
as  the  restoration  of  -aam  -aah  in  the  ace.  fern.  sing,  and  nom.  pi. 
respectively  of  the  suffixal  -a  -a  declensions. 

In  addition  to  the  above  restorations,  all  of  which  are  con- 
nected with  the  history  of  hiatus  and  combination,  there  are 
a  few  instances  in  which  the  text  appears  to  be  incorrect  in  other 
ways. 

To  represent  the  restorations  systematically,  we  should  write  not 
only  girdam  siiria  tudm,  but  also  da'isnd  indra  and  dhdmnd.  But 
such  forms  as  dayisnd,  indara,  dhdmand  probably  represent  with  fair 
accuracy  the  pronunciation  required,  and  in  these  rarer  cases  it  seems 
better  to  follow  Indian  methods  of  spelling. 

135.  Syllabic  restoration  is  required  wherever  y  or  v  is 
followed  by  a  vowel  with  svarita  or  grave  accent :  for  instance,  we 
must  read  stiar  for  svar,  ddhie  for  adhye.  Exceptions  are  rare, 
except  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

This  principle  is  recognized  by  all  commentators,  and  even  by  some 
of  the  texts  (Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar,  §  84  b):  and  effect  is  given 
to  it  in  all  the  texts  in  the  case  of  words  like  dhiyah,  rudriya.  The 
written  forms  i  u  are  therefore  used  in  preference  to  the  Indian  forms 
hj,  uv,  in  order  to  indicate  that  restoration  has  been  necessary. 

Restoration  is  also  required  in  the  vocative  case  of  nouns  if  the 
other  cases  require  it :  as  sahasia  i  147  5a  by  the  side  of  sahasiaih 
v  29  9a. 

The  words  asurya  (neut.),  vasavya  are  regularly  of  three  syllables 
in  the  Rigveda :  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  correct  the  accent,  and 
read  throughout  asurya,  vasavya  :  for  exceptions  see  §  151  ii. 

For  kvd  we  must  sometimes  read  ku  :  see  §  151  iii. 

Otherwise  the  exceptions  are  as  follows  : 

(a)  suffix  -ya,  -ya:  i  *162  4a  *8b;  ii  20  8a  (tavasyd),  30  10b 
(vlrya);  iii  *53  17c;  iv  1  13a  (manusya,),  *58  9a;  vi  47  16d 
(manusyd),  *75  16b;  vii  *55  7c,  98  6a  (pasavyd);  ix  56  3b 
(kanyh) ;  x  *87  22b,  *90  8c,  *130  5d  *6a,  150  4b  (manusya),  *151 
4c,  *163  lc  *2c. 

(b)  in  the  declension  of  stems  in  4,  -u  :     i  *162  20b  (tanvah) ; 

vi  46  12c  (tanve);  vii  *50  4e,  68  8d  (staryctm) ;  viii  76  12c 
(tanvam);         ix  96  21c  (camvdh) ;  x  *51  2b  *4c,  *85  30c  *31a, 

*95  9c,  *98  10c,  *155  2c. 

Also  svdr  ii  35  6a  (probably),  and  pathye  *v  51  14b  (probably). 

yajnyd  (or  yajhyd)  seems  to  be  required,  where  the  text  gives 
yajniya,  in  v  61  16c  and  vi  52  14a. 

In  any  case  two-thirds  of  the  instances  are  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

6—2 


84  The  -ya  suffixes 

136.  Syllabic  restoration  is  required  in  numerous  nouns  and 
adjectives  ending  in  the  suffixes  -ya,  -yd,  -tya,  -nya,  etc.,  preceded 
by  a  light  syllable. 

No  methodical  distinction  between  these  words  and  others  in 
which  the  restoration  is  not  required  has  been  established:  but 
the  difference  in  metrical  value  between  e.g.  hdvia  *  invocandus ' 
and  havyd  'drink  offering'  is  so  marked  that  it  is  necessary  to 
suppose  that  primitive  suffixes  -iya  or  -ia  and  -ya  existed  side 
by  side. 

The  particulars  are  as  follows  : 

(i)  Words  in  which  y  is  always  syllabic  in  the  Rigveda  are 
uksania  (prop,  name),  aucathid,  ksdmia,  gdnia,  jdmaria,  ddmia,  pusia, 
ydvia,  hfdia :  also  dnia,  in  which  the  suffix  is  -a :  the  gerundives 
dvyathia,  gddhia,  tujia,  ddbhia,  dfsia,  yujia,  vihdvia,  sdsia,  gopaydtia  : 
brahmanid,  samid,  hdvia,  himid.  For  yavyti  the  metrical  value  seems 
to  be  yavid  or  even  yaviti,  but  we  find  the  compound  yavydvatl. 

(ii)  In  the  following  words  also  y  is  regularly  syllabic,  but 
consonantal  exceptionally  in  the  passages  quoted :  dpya  ii  38  8a, 
iii  56  5c,  vi  50  lid,  *vii  35  lid;  irya  vi  54  8b,  x  106  4c;  jdnya 
ii  6  7c,  ix  49  2c  (the  compounds  have  always  -janya) ;  durya  i  91  19d, 
vii  1  lie;  dhdnya  v  41  8c  (and  in  jlvd-dhanya) ;  nary  a  iv  25  4d ; 
rdthya  i  35  6c,  180  4d,  ii  4  4d,  31  7d.  Gerundives  :  guhya  ii  32  2a, 
v  5  10b,  *x  53  3b,  79  3a;  mddya  ii  14  lb;  ranya  iii  55  7c  (the 
compounds  have  always  ranya-  -ranya) :  hdvya  i  108  6b,  116  6d, 
129  6b,  ii  23  13a,  37  2b,  39  id,  v  33  5d  :  carkftya  i  119  lOd,  iv  38  2d, 
viii  24  23c;  -drutya  x  134  7c. 

(iii)  In  divyd  and  sakhyd  the  syllabic  values  predominate,  being 
about  three  times  as  frequent  as  the  consonantal  values,  which  occur 
as  follows:    divyd  *i  164  46b  *52a ;  vi  59  9b;  *vii  35   lid, 

49  2a,  97  10b,  *103  2a;  ix  14  8a,  29  6b,  36  5b,  63  30b,  64  6b, 
71  9c,  86  lc  4b,  97  33a,  100  3d,  107  24b,  109  3b;  x  *34  9c,  64  16d, 
*98  5d,  110  6c,  124  9b,  *139  5b:  sakhyd  i  15  5c,  62  9a,  89  2c,  94  Id 
2d  3d,  138  2e  4g,  *163  8c;  iii  9  3d,  60  3a;         iv  25  7a,  28  la, 

33  2c;  vi   19  13a;  vii   18  12c,  82  8c;  viii  10  3c,  13  21a, 

19  30c,  44  20c  22c,  68  8b;  ix  56  2c,  86  9c,  97  5a,  107  19b 

20b;  x  25  lc,  40  7c,  62  lb,  *71  5a,  *88  2d,  *124  2d. 

In  words  included  in  (i)  and  (ii)  the  syllabic  and  consonantal  values 
are  often  found  side  by  side,  as  in 

prajdvatlsu  duridsu  durya  vii  1  lie 

vrnand  dtra  sakhidya  sakhydm  vii  18  1 2c. 

137.  In  the  suffix  -ya,  -yd  following  a  heavy  syllable,  the 
restoration  of  -ia,  -id  is  regularly  required,  except  in  sdntya  'good.' 

In  many  words  the  syllabic  value  is  represented  in  the  text  by  iy, 
as  rc/miyd,  abhriyd. 

The  fact  that  sdntya  is  always  disyllabic  suggests  that  satyd  may 


-ya  after  heavy  syllables  86 

be  the  true  reading.  One  or  two  other  words,  as  mdtsya  and 
mddhyathdina,  have  also  always  y  consonant,  but  the  occurrences  are 
few.  It  does  not  therefore  seem  practicable  to  distinguish  between  -la 
and  -ya  suffixes  after  heavy  syllables. 

The  exceptions  to  the  rule  hardly  number  one  in  every  ten  instances, 
but  they  are  much  commoner  in  the  words  daivyd  and  sdrya  than 
elsewhere :  these  instances  are  therefore  given  separately  below,  as  are 
also  the  instances  of  gerundive  forms  in  -ya. 

The  suffixes  -ya,  -yd  are  found  with  y  consonant  after  heavy 
syllables  exceptionally  as  follows : 

(i)  daivya  i  27  12b;  ii  3  7a  lOd,  5  2c;  iii  4  7a;  iv  42 
6b ;  v  5  7b;  vii  8  4d,  97  3c ;  viii  18  8a ;  x  65  10b,  66  13a, 
110  7a,  *128  3c,  *130  7c. 

(ii)  siirya  i  7  3b,  14  9a,  *24  8b,  47  7d,  48  7b,  51  4d,  83  5b,  84  Id, 
92  12d,  100  18d,  112  13a,  115  Id  2a  4a  5b,  117  5b,  122  2d,  124  lb,  135 
9f,  137  2e,  *164  14c,  *191  8a  *9a*10a;  ii  24  9d,  33  lb;  iii  30 
12a,  31   15d   17b,  32  8d,  34  9a,  39   5d,  44  2b,  54  19d;  iv  38 

10b,  *58  4c;  v  27  6d,  33  4c,  37  5c,  *40  5a  *6c  *8c  *9a,  54  10b, 
59  3b  5d,  62  lb,  63  4b  7d,  79  8c,  81  4b,  85  2d;  vi  12  Id,  17  3c  5a, 
30  5d,  44  23b,  72  lc;  vii  8  4b,  *33  8a,  *35  8a,  99  4b;  viii  3  6b, 
6  10c,  7  8b,  12  9a  30a,  25  21a,  27  19a,  29  10b,  32  23a,  43  32b,  56  5e, 
68  9b,  72  16c,  89  7b,  98  2b,  101  2d,  102  15c;  ix  1  6b,  *5  lie, 
17  5c,  27  5a,  28  5a,  41  5c,  54  2a,  63  7b,  64  7c,  69  6a,  72  3b,  86  22d, 
91  6d,  93  lc,  101  12c,  107  7d,  *113  3b;  x  *10  9b,  *12  7c,  *16  3a, 
*27  21b,  31  8d,  35  2c,  37  4a,  45  10c,  49  7a,  *58  8a,  *59  6c,  62  3a  lib, 
65  lie,  66  2b,  69  2d,  *72  7d,  *85  lb,  *88  6b,  *90  13b,  138  2d  3a  4c, 
*139  4d,  *151  5c,  *156  4b,  *178  3b;  suryd  x  *85  6c  *8c  *9c  *12c 
*13a  *20c  *35c  *38b;  sdryarasmi  x  139  la;  surydcandramdsa  i  102 
2c,  *v  51  15b,  *x  190  3a;  surydmdsd  x  64  3c,  68  lOd,  92  12c,  93  5b; 
ndndsurya  *ix  114  3a. 

(iii)  Gerundives:  il_ya  iv  24  2a,  x  3  4c ;  anindyd  i  180  7c; 
auumddya  ix  107  lie;  pravdeya  iv  22  5b,  viii  62  3c;  rdndya  vi  23 
6d :  daksdyya  i  129  2b,  ii  4  3d;  vitantasdyya  vi  18  6d  :  dhhvsenya 
v  55  4a;  didrksenya  i  146  5a,  v  55  4b;  marmrjenya  ii  10  Id; 
paprksenya  v  33  6a ;  vdrenya  v  22  3c ;  saparyenya  vi  1  6a. 

(iv)  Other  words:  agdstya  *vii  33  lOd;  aghnyd  *x  87  16c; 
dmartya  ii  11  2c,  vi  18  7b;  dsvya  iv  41  10a,  *x  87  16b ;  djya  x  79  5b, 
*90  6c,  *130  3b;  dptyd  v  41  9c;  2  drya  i  103  3d,  viii  24  27b,  x  65 
lid;  kdvyd  i  121   12c;  kdvya  i  96  lb,  *x  87  21b;  jyaisthya  i  5  6c, 


vaatdpyam  (probably)  i  121  8d,  ix  93  5b,  x  105  lc ;  vrtratarya  i  106 
2b,  vi  13  lc,  18  6b,  34  5c,  viii  37  la,  x  104  9c;  vfsnya  vi  25  3d; 
venyd  vi  44  8d ;  vaisya  *x  90  12c;  satrutdrya  vi  22  10b;  sdpya  x  48 
9a;  suvirya  i  184  4d,  iii  16  la  3b,  viii  22  18a,  23  27c;  saubhdgya 
*x  85  33c;  hdstya  ii  14  9c;  hotrvdrya  vi  70  4c. 

138.     In  the  declension  of  the  pronoun  tvdm  '  thou  '  the  forms 
tudm,  tudm,  tue  must  generally  be  restored,  and  tad  (instrumental) 


86  The  pronoun  tvam 

always.  We  must  also  generally  read  tua-  as  the  prior  element  of 
a  compound,  whether  the  meaning  is  instrumental  or  otherwise. 

The  exceptions  number  rather  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  oc- 
currences in  the  Rigveda  proper,  and  about  one  half  in  the  popular 
Rigveda.     They  occur  as  follows  : 

(i)  tvdm  i  27  4a,  28  5a,  31  10a,  36  2c  6c,  52  12a  15d,  53  10a  10c, 
54  6a,  76  5c,  80  7d,  91  10c  22c,  94  3c  6a  16a,  104  6a,  113  5b  6a  6a  6b 
6b,  123  lie,  129  la  (probably),  134  5f,  139  7a,  144  6b,  169  la,  170 
*5a  *5b,  174  lb  lc  10a,  189  3a  (prob.);  ii  1  la  3a  4a  4c  5a  5c  6a 

10b  lid,  9  4c,  11  4c,  16  6c,  *43  3a ;  iii  16  3a,  19  5c,  35  3b,  41  7c  ; 

iv  1  5a,  2  2a  10a,  3  5a,  17  13a,  22  10a;  v  2  lie,  3  2a,  13  4a  6b, 

30  5a,  32  lb,  33  2a,  81  5a;  vi  1  lc,  3  lc,  13  3c;  15  2c  3a,  16  5a, 

23  la,  33  4a,  45  17c,  46  2a,  48  8b,  50  9a,  *75  lc;  vii  15  12a,  20 

9d,  29  4d,  32  lib,  *55  4a,  99  Id;  viii  4  16d,  11  la  3a,  13  26a, 

16  12a,  19  10a  30c,  23  12a,  24  26c,  26  20a  25a,  36  7d,  37  4a  5a  6a  6a 
7d,  43  15a  32a,  45  6a,  54  8b,  60  12e  14c,  61  16a,  62  11a,  64  3a  3b, 
66  6c,  71  5a,  80  2c,  82  7c  =  8c  =  9c,  90  4c,  92  32c,  93  33a,  96  17c,  *100 
2c;  ix  4  5a,  67  26a,  88  lc,  97  43d,  98  4a,  110  7c ;  x  1  4d, 

4  lc,  10  *14a  *14c,  *15  12d,  *16  13a,  *18  9c,  *28  3b,  44  5c,  54  5d, 
*59  5d,  61  21c,  75  4c,  79  5d,  *84  3d,  *85  26d  *45a,  *86  4a,  91  3c,  *95 
18d,  *97  18c  *23a,  104  9c,  *108  9a,  118  8a,  *128  6b,  134  4a,  *145  5b. 

(ii)  tvdm  i  9  4b,  12  8a,  14  5a,  36  19a,  48  14a,  49  4c,  91  21d, 
130  6c;  ii  1  13c,  11  lc  (probably),  17  7b,  18  3c;  iii  8  la  *llc, 
35  9b,  37  6b,  43  4a;  iv  12  la,  *18  12b,  31  7a;  v  13  5a,  29  lie, 
32  12a ;  vi  2  2c,  15  8a,  16  13a ;  vii  11  2a,  21  8a,  22  2c ;  viii  1 
5a,  6  12a,  21  la  5c,  43  20a,  60  lc,  67  10a,  92  14c  22c;  ix  45 
3a;  x  *10  13c  *14a,   21    2c,    38    5a,    44    5c,    *86    3a,   *98    9b, 

112  7a,  122  5c  :  tvdmkdma  viii  11  7c. 

(iii)  tve  ii  1  14a,  9  3d ;  iii  19  4a ;  iv  31  6c,  32  12b  ;  vi  1 
13c  13d,  5  2a,  11  3a,  12  2a,  34  la,  47  14a;  vii  1  21c,  8  5a,  18 
lc ;        viii  19  18d,  66  12a,  97  Id,  99  2b ;        *x  98  10a,  105  8c,  *142  la. 

(iv)  tvdr  in  composition:  tvddatta  ii  33  2a,  viii  92  18b;  tvdddta 
i  10  7b,  iii  40  6c,  v  7  10b,  39  lb;  tvdduta  v  6  8d ;  tvdydt  i  53  3d, 
125  2c,  viii  2  16b;  tvdyd  i  101  8d  9b,  ii  18  6d ;  tvdyu  vi  47  10c; 
tvdvat  i  81  5c,  91  8c,  165  9b,  vi  21  lOd,  30  4a,  vii  32  23a,  x  38  5d, 
100  la  ;  tvdvrdha  i  56  4a,  x  69  9d  ;  tv&amp;hata  vii  32  7c ;  tvotdsah  i  8  3a, 
x  22  9b;  indra-tvotdh  i  132  lb,  viii  19  16d. 

For  other  forms  of  tvdm  see  below  §  148  iii. 

139.  Syllabic  restoration  is  required,  more  often  than  not, 
where  the  text  gives  y  v  r  or  n  immediately  followed  by  a  case- 
ending  beginning  with  a  vowel,  and  especially  in  the  instrumental 
singular  and  gen.  loc.  dual  forms:  for  instance,  we  must  read 
pdtid,  mddhud,  pitaroh,  svadhdvane,  where  the  text  gives  pdtyd, 
m&amp;dhva,  pitroh,  svadhdvne  respectively. 

(i)  In  the  instrumental  singular  and  gen.  loc.  dual  forms  of  nouns 
in  -i  -i  the  measurements  -id,  -yd  are  about  equally  common  in  the 


Instrumental*  of  -i  .stems  87 

Rigveda  proper  after  light  syllables.     The  two  forms  are  frequently 
used  side  by  side,  as 

sdcid  'kartd  pitdrd  ytivdnd 

sdcyd  'kartd  camasdm  devapdnam  iv  35  5ab. 
In  the  masculine  -id  may  have  been  the  original  form ;  but  if  so,  it  lias 
in  almost  all  instances  been  replaced  in  the  text  by  -ind.  In  the 
feminine  -l  is  the  prevailing  form  in  the  Rigveda,  and  -id  seems  to  Ikj 
due  to  the  influence  of  the  masculine  declension ;  the  original  form  in  -I 
seems  to  have  been  altered  in  the  text  to  -yd  in  several  instances,  to 
the  injury  of  the  rhythm.  Nouns  in  -vl  have  regularly  -vyd,  as 
prthivyd. 

Restoration  of  -id,  -ioh  is  required  as  follows : 

-id  :  masc.  nouns,  pdtid  *x  85  22d,  sdkhid  i  53  7c,  vi  56  2b,  *viii  48 
10a,  x  6  2c,  *71  10b:  fern,  nouns,  dsvavatid  i  30  17a,  tmdnidx  110  10a, 
tvisid  x  89  2d,  ddvidyutatid  ix  64  28a,  navyasid  vi  22  7a  (probably), 
brahmaitid  viii  6  33a,  rdjid  x  100  12c,  rohinid  viii  101  13b,  sdcid  iii  60 
6b,  iv  20  9a,  35  5a,  56  3d,  vi  17  6b,  26  6d,  31  4c,  44  24c,  viii  96  13c 
17d,  x  61  3b,  104  3d,  sdmid  i  83  4b,  ii  1  9b,  simid  i  151  la  3d,  sumatid 
v  25  3b  (probably),  sustutid  viii  16  3a  (probably),  96  20b,  sfnid  i  58  4b, 
hdrimd  ix  111  la. 

-ioh :  ardnioh  *iii  29  2a,  hdrioh  i  7  2a,  iii  45  2c,  iv  16  lib,  viii 
33  4c' 

The  declension  of  rai  '  wealth '  is  hardly  to  be  separated  from  that 
of  ray i :  a  trisyllabic  form  rayind  (rayid,  rdyid)  is  required  in  i  129  9a 
10a,  vii  67  9b,  x  93  13a,  and  similarly  ray  dye  [v  41  lib],  i  100  16b, 
raydyah  i  167  lc,  viii  71  4b,  and  perhaps  iv  48  lb. 

(ii)    The  text  has  -yd,  -yoh  in  accordance  with  the  metre  as  follows : 

-yd :  masculine  nouns,  ndmyd  i  53  7c,  pdtyd  *x  85  24d  *27c  *36b, 
pavyd  i  88  2d,  v  52  9c,  vi  8  5c;  rayyd  *x  19  7d ;  sdkhyd  vi  21  7c, 
viii  43  14c,  x  50  2a;  feminine  nouns,  gdtumdtyd  vii  54  3b,  mddhumatyd 
i  157  4b,  mithatyd  vii  48  3d,  vasatyd  i  66  9a,  vdjavatyd  i  31  18d,  sdcyd 
iv  35  5b  5c,  sddlidraiiyd  i  167  4b:  probably  in  dsvavatyd  i  53  5d, 
tindnyd  i  188  10a,  mahyd  iv  1  9b,  somavalyd  x  113  8b :  and  always  in 
prthivyd. 

-yoh:  ardnyoh  vii  1  la,  drjunyoh  *x  85  13d,  divdsprthivyoh  ii  2  3b, 
v  49  5d,  x  3  7b,  *35  2a,  yuvatyoh  vi*49  2b,  x  3  7b. 

(iii)  On  the  other  hand  the  text  regularly  gives  mati  as  instru- 
mental of  mati,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  this  form  should  not  be 
restored  for  matyti  v  58  5d.  In  the  compounds  -matt  is  always 
required  by  the  metre,  namely  prdmati  (text  prdmatyd)  i  53  5c,  sumati 
(text  sumatyd)  i  31  18d,  v  42  4d,  x  29  8d :  and  on  this  analogy  it  is 
quite  probable  that  we  should  restore  (in  accordance  with  the  metre) 
asdnl  ii  14  2b,  ndvyasl  viii  51  3c,  and  hiranydyl  viii  1  32b,  78  2c. 

For  the  gen.  loc.  dual  forms  of  rbdasl  see  below  §§151  iii,  173  i. 

(iv)  In  the  same  cases  in  the  declension  of  nouns  in  -iy  -id,  -ioh  are 
regular  after  heavy  syllables. 

The  exceptions  are  found  almost  exclusively  in  the  popular  Rigveda, 
viz.  dkutyd  *x  151  4c,  istya  *x  169  2b,  devdJmtyd  x  63  lie,  sam'icyoh 


88  Stems  in  -an,  -man,  -van 

*x   24   5b.     In   the  last  instance  but  one  devdhutl  seems  a  probable 
restoration,  cf.  sdhutl,  ii  33  4b. 

(v)  In  the  declension  of  nouns  in  -u  there  appears  to  be  a  similar 
differentiation  of  gender  to  that  which  is  found  in  the  -i  nouns.  The 
masculine  and  neuter  nouns  have  the  instrumental  either  in  -una  or  in 
-vd,  as  krdtund,  mddhund,  krdtvd,  mddhvd,  where  it  is  very  possible 
that  the  forms  in  -una  have  replaced  an  early  -ud :  the  -vd  form  is  the 
more  common.  In  the  feminine  nouns  it  is  usually  necessary  to  restore 
-ud  (or  perhaps  -uyd  on  the  analogy  of  the  adverbs  such  as  sddhuyd) 
for  -vd  of  the  text.  In  the  dual  the  restoration  -uoh  is  regularly 
required. 

Restoration  is  exceptionally  required  in  krdtud  (text  krdtvd)  §  151  ii : 
whereas  the  consonantal  value  is  exceptionally  required  in  panvd  (fern.) 
i  65  4a,  mddhvd  (fem.)  *ix  5  10b,  bdhvolt  (masc.)  vii  25  lc. 

In  the  dative  singular  sahdsra-bdhue,  §  151  ii. 

(vi)  Restoration  is  required  in  the  dual  forms  of  the  nouns  of 
relationship,  viz.  pitaroh  (pitrroh)  for  pitroh  of  the  text,  and  so 
mdtardh  and  svasaroh  :  but  mdtrbh  is  found  vii  3  9c.  In  v  1 1  3a  the 
Taitt.  Br.  reads  mdtrvbh  (A.  Ludwig,  Rigveda,  iv  335,  vi  247). 

(vii)  In  the  declension  of  nouns  in  -man,  -van  following  heavy 
syllables  an  must  regularly  be  restored  for  n  before  case-endings 
beginning  with  a  vowel :  in  the  case  of  ddvdne  and  some  other  words 
treated  as  infinitives  (§  84,  A  38)  this  value  is  given  in  the  text. 
Certain  words,  apparently  such  as  were  brought  into  use  later,  are 
exceptions,  viz.  grdvan,  dadhikrdvan,  Ibman.  In  the  case  of  stems  in 
-an,  and  those  in  -man,  -van  which  follow  a  light  syllable,  restoration  is 
not  required,  except  once  in  rdjand  *x  97  22b. 

Consonantal  value  is  found  exceptionally  in  dhindmndm  ix  88  4c, 
prdtarydvnah  i  45  9a,  bhuriddvnah  ii  27  17b,  sutapdvne  i  5  5a, 
sutapavnah  viii  2  7c,  suddvne  i  76  3d,  svadhdvne  v  32  lOd. 

The  instrumental  of  mahimdn  seems  to  have  the  three  forms 
mahnd,  mahind,  mahimnd:   see  §  151  ii,  iii. 

140.  Restoration  is  seldom  regularly  required  in  isolated 
words  and  forms.  Although  dayisnd,  prdyistha,  sidma  are  all 
commoner  than  the  forms  desnd,prestha,  sy&amp;ma  which  appear  in  the 
text,  other  words  of  the  same  type  have  the  shorter  forms  more 
often,  so  that  these  words  are  better  considered  as  belonging  to 
the  second  group :  and  in  the  same  way  bhadsvat  and  dadsvat  are 
most  conveniently  treated  in  connexion  with  bhads  and  fdads. 

The  following  forms  and  words  remain,  and  may  be  regarded  as 
sporadic  instances  of  internal  hiatus : 

(i)  reduplicated  participles  in  -at,  -ana;  didiat,  dididna ;  didhiat, 
didhidna ;  pipidna,  pipidnd ;  memiat,  memidna :  except  didhydnd 
i  113  lOd.     Cf.  §  142  iii  b. 

(ii)     gerunds  in  -tva,  -itva,  except  kartvd  *i  161  3b. 


Restorations  not  regularly  required  89 

(iii)    various  initial  syllables,  namely 

jyd  '  bow ':  jid,  except  in  iv  27  3c,  *x  166  3b :  jiakd  always. 

jyok  'long':  jiok,  except  in  *vi  28  3d,  *x  124  Id. 

tredkti :  trayidhd,  except  in  vi  69  8d,  *x  87  lOd. 

dvd  i  two ' :  dud  etc.  are  the  more  usual  forms,  but  dvd,  dvau  etc. 
are  found  in  i  28  2a,  35  6a,  83  3a,  iii  2  9d,  iv  30  19a,  33  5a,  v  62  6d, 
viii  72  7b,  *x  17  2d:  dvddasd  *vii  103  9a,  dvddamkrti  *i  164  12a. 
For  dvih  see  §  148  v. 

vl  'go':  vidnti,  vidntu,  but  dvyan  iii  49  lb;  vydntah  i  127  5f  5g; 
vyantu  vii  19  6d. 

sreni  and  derivatives  :  always  srdyiui. 

syond  '  soft ' :  always  siond. 

svargd  '  heaven ' :  always  suargd. 

On  the  other  hand  svand  is  always  to  be  read  for  suvdnd  of  the 
text  from  su  *  press ':  but  not  in  vii  38  2d,  where  it  is  the  participle  of 
su  ■  stir.' 

141.  Restorations  belonging  to  the  second  group  are  all  open 
to  some  question,  although  in  most  cases  the  doubt  is  very  slight. 
In  a  large  number  of  instances  the  verses  can  be  alternatively 
explained  as  consisting  of  fewer  syllables  than  the  normal  number, 
and  in  particular  as  being  of  the  decasyllabic  or  catalectic  types 
(§§  20,  21).  It  has  been  shewn  in  §  94  iii,  vi  above  that 
decasyllabic  variations  are  only  common  in  about  50  hymns  of 
the  Rigveda,  and  catalectic  verses  in  only  six.  If  then  we  find 
that  the  opportunity  for  restoration  occurs  largely  outside  these 
limits,  we  must  accept  that  as  the  simpler  explanation.  In  other 
words,  it  is  not  credible  that  a  license  of  metre  should  occur  in  a 
great  number  of  hymns,  and  at  the  same  time  be  restricted  to 
three  or  four  groups  of  words. 

Where  however  a  verse  occurring  in  a  decasyllabic  or  catalectic 
hymn  may  equally  well  be  explained  as  decasyllabic  or  catalectic 
respectively,  a  real  doubt  arises  as  to  the  particular  case:  all 
such  instances  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets  below.  But  in 
decasyllabic  hymns  of  the  types  described  in  §  94  iii  bed,  and  in 
the  catalectic  hymn  x  26,  the  preference  must  always  be  given  to 
the  shorter  verse-form,  as  being  the  more  common  in  these  hymns: 
and  the  restoration  of  the  full  number  of  syllables  is  therefore  not 
suggested. 

In  the  groups  now  to  be  dealt  with  the  restorations  amount  ou 
an  average  to  about  one-third  of  the  whole  number  of  occurrences: 
but  in  a  few  individual  words  (see  §  140)  the  restored  forms  are 
more  numerous  than  those  in  which  the  text  is  correct. 


90  Radical  stems  of  nouns 

142.  Restoration  is  frequently  required  in  radical  steins  in 
-a,  and  occasionally  in  those  in  -%  and  -u,  where  they  appear  in  the 
text  in  combination  with  a  noun  or  verb  termination,  or  with 
noun  suffixes  such  as  -as  and  -istha. 

(i)  This  restoration  is  frequently  required  in  the  nom.  ace.  m.  f.  of 
all  numbers,  in  the  declension  of  radical  stems  in  -a,  -a. 

Examples,  arranged  in  the  order  of  the  stems,  are  as  follows  : 

ksd :  ksdam  i  67  5a,  [174  7b],  vi  6  4b,  x  31  9a ;  ksdah  iv  28  5d. 

gnd:  gndam  v  43  6b ;  gndah  (nom.)  [i  61  8a],  v  46  8a,  vi  50  15c, 
[68  4a]  ;  gndah  (ace.)  v  43  13c :  gndah-pdtih  ii  38  10b.  Grassmann 
suggests  the  readings  gandm  etc.,  with  which  Lanman  compares  the 
Zend  ghendo  :  but  in  v  46  8a  gndah  is  metrically  preferable. 

jd :  jdaspdtih  vii  38  6a,  abjdam  vii  34  16a,  navajdah  iv  6  3c. 

jnd:  rtajiidah  x  65  14b. 

da:  draviuoddah  vii  16  11a,  viii  39  6c. 

pd:  gopda  viii  25  la;  gopdah  viii  31  13b,  x  23  6d;  -gopda  i  120  7c; 
-gopdah  v  38  5c  5d,  viii  46  32d  32e :  tanupdam  viii  71  13d,  tanupdd 
vii  66  3a ;  paswpdah  iv  6  4  c. 

prd:  kak$iaprdam  viii  3  22b,  -prdd  i  10  3b;  rathaprdam  viii 
74  10a. 

yd:  evaydah  [v  41  16b]. 

sd:  ksetrasdMiti  iv  38  lc. 

sthd:  girisfhdam  ix  85  10b;  giristhdah  ix  18  la,  62  4b,  98  9c; 
pathesthdam  v  50  3c ;  paruthdah  *x  97  10a;  rathesthdam  viii  33  14a; 
vakmnextMah  v  19  5e.  The  forms  [kdfthaah  i  63  5c],  kdstliaam  vii 
93  3c  are  metrically  probable,  and  may  be  due  to  a  real  or  fancied 
derivation  from  this  stem. 

snd :  ghvtasndah  viii  46  28b. 

For  ablative  forms  in  -oat  see  below  §  151  i. 

(ii)  Some  of  the  corresponding  cases  of  go  'cow,'  div  'sky,'  and 
path  ■  path  '  are  frequently  disyllabic.  For  the  ace.  sing,  of  div  '  sky  ' 
we  may  read  either  didm  or  dydam.  The  form  didm  is  evidently 
permissible,  since  diauh  often  occurs  in  the  nominative :  and  dydam  is 
therefore  only  suggested  when  it  is  metrically  preferable. 

The  examples  are : 

go:  gdam  i  151  4d,  v  52  16b,  vi  45  7c,  46  2c,  viii  1  2b,  4  21b, 
*x  59  10a  :  gdah  (ace.  pi.)  [i  61  10c],  iv  1  15b,  vi  47  24b  (preferably), 
ix  87  7d. 

div:  dydam  i  127  2d,  vi  48  21a,  67  6d,  72  2c,  viii  89  5d. 

path:  pdnthaam  i  127  6g  6h,  v  10  Id,  viii  68  13b:  pdnthaah  viii 
31  13c. 

For  nidam,  vdam  see  below  §  151  i. 

Closely  allied  With  the  above  are  the  following  cases,  in  which  o,  au 
of  the  text  appear  to  have  disyllabic  value  : 

go:  gdvah  (gun.  s.)  i  61  12c,  180  5b,  181  8d :  gdvamdn  ix  107  9a: 
gavapithiaya  x  *95  11a :  gdvajdta  *vii  35  14d,  *x  53  5b. 

nail:  ndvdh  (nom.  s.)  v  59  2b  (the  only  occurrence  of  this  case). 

maghdvan:  maghdvanah  (gen.  s.)  v  16  3a,  ix  32  lb;  maghdvanoh 


Radical  stems  of  verbs  u\ 

(gen.  du.)  v  86  3b:  maghdvanih  (nom.  pi.  fern.)  vi  65  3c:  or  inaghdownah, 
etc.,  see  §  168  i. 

In  the  case  of  the  nominative  dyauh  the  restoration  diauh  seems 
more  probable :  for  the  instances  see  §  148  iv. 

(iii)  Similarly  a-  is  found  with  hiatus  in  the  conjugation  of  verbs 
in  radical  -a.  In  similar  forms  from  verbs  in  -I  and  -u  iy-y  ir- 
respectively are  generally  found  in  the  text :  but  a  few  cases  remain, 
especially  in  the  conjugation  of  the  verb  bhu  'be,'  which  seem  to  fall 
under  this  heading. 

(a)     Verbs  in  -a : 

g(L  '  go ' :  gaat  viii  5  39a. 

da  'give':  [daam  x  49  la];  ddah  viii  2  15b,  [x  148  4b];  daat 
[vi  63  9c],  x  80  4a ;  da-idm  (text  deydm)  viii  1  5b. 

dhd  'put':  dhdah  vi  19  lOd;  [dhaama  i  122  12a];  dJiaatam  x  93 
10a;  dha-idm  v  64  4b. 

pa  'protect':  pdanti  i  41  2b,  [167  8a],  v  18  4b,  52  2d  4d,  67  3d, 
viii  46  4c  :  pdat  iv  55  5c,  paantu  iv  4  12d,  pdantah  ix  98  8b.  Here 
may  be  included  the  occurrences  of  the  form  pdantam,  of  which  the 
meaning  is  often  obscure:  i  [122  la],  155  la,  viii  92  la,  ix  65  28c  29c 
30c,  *x  88  la. 

pa  *  drink  ' :  pdah  iv  20  4c. 

prd  '  fill ' :  prdah  vi  46  5d. 

bhd  '  shine ' :  bhdasi  ii  2  2d. 

yd  'go':  yaasi  vi  12  6c;  yaati  ii  30  lc;  ydanti  i  37  13a;  ydaidam 
x  40  la;  yaatdh  i  141  8a,  [v  33  5b] ;  ya-iydm  (text  yaydm)  v  64  3b. 

sihd  'stand' :  asthaat  i  74  8c,  vi  45  31b,  vii  16  3a,  viii  23  4a. 

(6)     Verbs  in  -i,  -u : 

dl  'shine':  dldie  iii  55  3b,  didiatam  iii  27  15c.     For  dididna  see 

§  uo- 

dhi  'ponder':  didhie  v  33  la.     For  didhidna  see  §  140. 

dhd  'shake':  ddvldhuat  viii  60  13b  (text  ddvidhvat). 

nl  'lead':  ndyisam  [x  61  4d],  ndyin  i  129  5d,  nayitdr  v  50  la  2a 
5a,  *x  103  8a;  anayitd  ix  108  13b,  prauayitdr  [i  169  5b],  viii  19  37d, 
46  lb. 

prl  'please':  prayitdrah  [i  148  5d]. 

bhu  'be':  bhuuh  (bhuvah)  vi  15  3a,  *x  149  2c:  bhuut  i  173  8c, 
iv  43  4a,  x  23  lc,  48  9a;  abhuut  viii  46  24d;  bhuutam  viii  22  16c, 
bhuuta  vi  50  15d,  bhuutu  i  94  12c. 

M,  si  'sharpen':  siat  i  130  4b  4c. 

hit  'call':  dhuam  etc.  i  *24  12c  *13a,  iii  56  4b,  iv  6  9d,  v  29  8c, 
vi  50  4d,  x  122  8a :  juhue  *x  149  5b. 

(iv)  Restoration  is  often  required  in  superlative  formations  from 
stems  in  -a  or  -I,  as  follows  : 

jyestha:  jydyistha  i  100  4c,  127  2b,  ii  18  8c,  iv  1  2c,  22  9a,  56  la, 
vi  48  21e,  vii  65  lc,  86  4a,  97  3a,  viii  23  23b,  46  19d,  74  4b,  102  lib, 
x  [50  4d,  61  17d],  78  5a,  *120  la. 

destha  :  ddyistha  viii  66  6d. 

dhktha :  dhdyistlia  *i  170  5b,  iv  41  3a,  vii  93  Id. 


92  The  genitive  plural  ending 

prestha:  prdyistha  i  167  10a,  169  Id,  181  la,  186  3a,  v  43  7c,  vi 
26  8b,  [63  Id],  vii34  14b,  36  5d,  88  la,  97  4a,  viii  84  la,  103  10a. 

yestha :  ydyistha  v  [41  3a],  74  8b,  vii  56  6a. 

srestha:  srdyistka  iv  1  6a,  v  82  lc,  vi  16  26a,  [68  2a],  x  63  16a, 
76  2a;  srdyisthavarcas  v  65  2a,  vi  51  10a;  srdywthasocis  viii  19  4b. 

The  following  case  seems  very  similar  : 

desiid :  dayisiid  vi  63  8a,  vii  20  7b,  37  3a,  58  4d,  93  4d. 

(v)  The  restoration  of  aa  is  also  required  in  the  stems  dds  and 
bhds  (Greek  &lt;£dws)  as  follows  : 

dds:  dadsvat  i  48  Id,  iv  2  7d,  v  9  2a,  vi  33  lb,  68  5c,  x  144  2b; 
sndads-  i  [63  7c],  184  Id,  185  9c,  vii  32  10a. 

bhds:  bhadh  viii  1  28c,  23  lib;  bhaasd  vi  10  4b,  x  3  lc;  bhadsvat 
i  92  7a,  113  4a,  x  37  8b. 

Somewhat  similar  is  vdata  for  vdta  'wind':  [i  174  5b],  175  4d, 
180  6c,  186  10c ;  vii  40  6d  ;  ix  97  52c ;  [x  22  4a  5a,  23  4d], 
*158  lb. 

143.  The  restoration  of  -aam  for  -dm  in  the  genitive  plural 
of  all  declensions  is  required  in  about  one-third  of  the  occurrences. 
A  great  number  of  the  instances  are  at  the  end  of  lyric  or 
dimeter  verse,  and  others  fall  near  the  caesura  in  trimeter  verse  : 
but  a  sufficient  number  of  examples  remain  to  shew  that  a 
metrical  explanation  is  inadequate,  even  if  it  could  be  supposed 
that  the  large  proportion  of  instances  was  not  a  sufficient  proof  of 
the  reality  of  forms  in  -aam. 

Such  examples  are  the  following : 

cittir  apdam  \\  dame  vlsvdyuh  i    67  10a  (Dvipada  Viraj). 

vispardhaso  \\  -nardam  iid  sdmsaih  173  10a  (Decas.  Tristubh). 

stotfndam  vivdci  vi    45  29b  (catal.  dim.  verse). 

maghonaam  \\  visvesaam  suddnavah  viii    19  34c  (Usnih). 

devdnaaiii  yd  in  mdnah  31  15c  (dimeter). 

iydm  esaam  \\  amftdnaam  gih  x    74     3a  (Tristubh). 

d  va  rFijasa  \\  urjdatn  viustisu  76     la  (Jagati). 

(i)  Restoration  of  -aam  is  very  commonly  required  at  the  end  of 
dimeter  verses,  as  follows  : 

i  1  8a,  3  lib,  4  3a  3b,  5  2a  2b,  7  9a  9c,  11  lc,  17  2c  4a  4b  5b, 
24  3b,  25  14b,  26  9a  9b,  28  lc  =  2c  =  3c,  30  2a  11a  lie  15b,  36  la 
lb,  37  3a  9a  13c  15a,  38  10a  12b,  39  3d,  41  3b,  44  9a,  45  4c,  46  2b 
4a  5a  7a,  48  2d  3b  4d,  75  3a  4a,  81  9c,  84  2d,  86  2b  6c,  88  6c,  97  3a, 
127  2e  7d  7e  8d  lOg,  128  7d,  129  8c  lie,  *133  2b  *3b,  134  6c  6d, 
158  6c,  176  2b,  187  5c  6a  7b  8a,  *191  4c  *13a  *13b;  iii  10  lb  4a, 

13  3a,  16  Id  4d,  62  6a;  iv  7  3c,  8  8a  8b,  9  5b  5c,  30  20a,  31  2a 

3a  3b  4c  5a,  32  15a  17a  19a,  46  la,  47  2a,  48  5a  5b;  v  6  7c  7d, 

7  lc  3b  6c,  9  3c  4b  6d,  10  3a,  16  2a  4a,  18  3b  5d  5e,  25  lc,  35  2c, 
39  4a  4b,  51  6a,  52  7c  9c  15a,  53  la  10a  11a,  56  5a  5b,  61  3a  14a, 
64  4c  5c,  65  6d,  66  3a  3b  4c  5b,  67  2c  5b,  74  7a  7b  8a,  84  la,  86  4a, 


The  genitive  plural  ending  93 

87  2d  3e;  vi  16  la,  44  2b,  45  29a  29c  31a,  46  12b,  48  2d  8b 
53  5a;  vii  16  2d  7d,  32  lid  25d,  66  3b,  74  6b,  96  lb  2d,  102  2a 

2c ;  viii  1  4b  30b,  2  34c,  3  13a,  5  13a  37b  37e,  6  28a  28b  44a  46c 

47b,  7  14a  15a,  8  12b  18c,  15  10a,  17  14b,  18  la  2a  2b  16a,  19  8d  37c, 
20  3a  11a  14b  14d,  22  13a,  23  7b  25a  25b,  24  4b  17a  24a,  25  14a  23a, 
26  16a  18b,  27  15b,  28  5b,  29  6b,  31  10a  10b  14b,  32  15a  15b  19c 
20a,  33  12d,  34  3a  5a,  39  2b  4c  5c  6a  6b,  40  3a,  41  Id  5a  7b,  45  2a 
7c  28a,  46  lc  2b  18b  18c  18d  19a  22d  26b  29c,  47  2a,  51  5a,  53  la 
lb  8d,  54  7b,  56  3a  3b,  60  17d,  63  la,  64  3a  3b  3c  4b,  65  10a  10b  11a, 
66  5b,  67  9a  13a  14a,  68  4c  4d  6c,  69  2a  2b  2c  18b,  70  la  12a,  71 
lib  13b  15d,  74  13d,  75  4c,  78  lc  6a,  83  7a  7b,  92  Id  3a  6a,  93  16b 
33a,  94  la  lc  8a,  95  3c,  98  6a,  101  6b,  103  6b  7d  10a;  ix  1  3c 

4a,  10  6a,  23  7a,  47  5a,  52  4a  4b  5b,  58  2a,  61  lib,  64  27a  27b,  65 
23b,  67  13a,  101  6c,  102  la  4c,  103  4a,  107  8b,  108  13a  13c,  *112  lb 
*2b ;  x  9  5a  5b,  [22  10c  12c  14b],  24  2c  3a,  33  8a  8b,  93  5c  9b 

9dl4d,  *97  8a*8c,  126  6d,  133  lf  =  2f  =  3f,  134  lc  Id,  176  la,  187  lb. 

(ii)  Elsewhere  in  Dimeter  verse  occasions  for  restoration  are  much 
less  common,  but  it  is  required  as  follows  : 

i  7  9b,  25  7a,  26  lb,  29  2a,  30  5a,  43  5c,  46  8b  9b,  50  5a,  128  5e, 
133  7c,  176  3b,  187  6b;  iii  51  10b;  iv9  2c;  v  10  4d,  18  3c 
5b,  52  3c,  61  10a,  64  4d  5d,  74  2d  ;  vi  16  lb  18b,  45  9b  10b  16b 

19a  29b;  viii  5  37d,  17  14d,  18  16b,  19  37e,  20  14b,  23  12a,  24 

14a  18a,  25  23b,  31  15c-  16c  =  17c,  40  2c,  41  2b,  46  22c,  53  3a,  68  7d, 
69  2d  3c,  71  13a,  75  8a,  92  3b  30b,  93  31b  33b,  94  8b,  102  10a  10b, 
103  10c;  ix  15  5c,  31  2c,  64  10b,  104  5a,  105  5a;  x  20  f2a, 
22  lc  13c  13d,  *57  3c,  93  3a  3b  4c  13b. 

(iii)  In  Trimeter  verse  occasions  for  restoration  occur  chiefly 
either  at  the  end  of  verses  in  lyric  metres  (not  in  Jagati),  or  in  the 
earlier  part  of  lyric  and  Tristubh  verses.  Many  of  the  latter  are 
found  in  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  metre,  and  these  may  also  be 
interpreted  as  decasyllabic  Tristubh  verses :  the  few  cases  in  which 
restoration  of  -aam  would  produce  in  such  hymns  an  irregular  rhythm 
are  omitted  from  the  list. 

i  [61  5d  12d],  67  10a,  [77  4a],  94  12c, 
129  8b1  lib1,  134  6a  6b,  149  4c,  [167  lOd" 
10a,  [174  10b  10c],  181  la,  186  5c  7d; 

iv  1  20a  20b,  2  18c,  [21  8b] ;  v  "[33  2b,  41  10b,  45  3b  8c],  53 

10b1,  56  lc  5c,  87  3c ;  vi  3  8c,  13  3d,  15  13c,  [20  3d,  24  Id  2c  4c], 

25  3c,  [33  3d],  47  9c,  48  8a  12c  12c1,  52  14b  15b,  60  13c,  [63  10b],  67 
la,  [68  2b  2c  4b  7c]  ;  vii  9  2c,  16  2c1  7c1,  32  5a1  7a1  lie1,  56  24b, 

73  3a,  *103  5a;  viii  1  21c,  17  14c  14c1,  19  7b  33c1  34b' 34c  36b1, 

20  3b  8a1  14c  14c1,  23  2c1,  24  23c1,  25  23c,  46  16a  16a1,  60  9c,  70  lc 
lc1  12c,  71  13a,  101  6c1  ;  ix  108  10c1  13b1,  111  2a;  x  [23 

lb]  lb1,  29  Id,  45  12a,  [49  2b,  50  7b],  74  la  3a  3a,  76  la,  78  Id  3b 
3d  4a,  *88  6c,  [93  5a]  12b1,  *103  8a,  115  5d,  [148  4b]. 

1  at  end  of  lyric  verse. 

144.  Syllabic  restoration  is  frequently  required  in  the  suf- 
fixes  -bhyam,    -bhyah    following   heavy  syllables.      Many   of  the 


122  3b  4c  10b,  127  8b]  10f," 

,  168  2c  5c,  [169  lc,  173  9b] 
ii  4  2a,  19  3d,  20  3b],  23  8a; 


94  Other  suffixes 

occurrences  are  at  the  end  of  dimeter  verses:  but  (unlike  the 
gen.  pi.  -aam)  they  are  rare  in  lyric  verse,  and  comparatively 
common  in  Jagati. 

Resolution  is  required  as  follows  : 

-bhidm :  i  20  3a1,  136  lb2  lc1  6a2,  viii  6  36b1,  x  *14  lie,  *163  4b1. 

-bhiah:  i  7  10bl,  13  lib,  34  6b2,  43  t6c3,  49  3d,  55  5b2,  58  6b2, 
64  lb2,  80  2c,  85  8c2,  90  3b1,  102  3d,  112  5a2  21c2,  122  8c,  131  5d], 
132  4f,  134  4f2  4g\  139  7b2  7b1  7c1  7d\  142  6b,  146  5c2  5d,  188  10b, 
*191  9c1;  ii  1  lb  lc2,  4  5b,  5  8b1,  23  17a,  32  2b2,  41  12a;  iii  2 

6d2,  3  11a,  34  7b,   53   16a2;  iv    26  4b,   30  4a1,   36   8a,  41   3b, 

53  4c2,  54  lc2  2a2  2d2  5a2;  v  5  lib1  lie,  11  Id,  52  5c1  5d\  54 

9a2  9b2;  vi  8  5a2,  15  17d',  30  3b,  46  9d\  47  3d,  59  6b1,  62  6a, 

68  4c;  vii  32  26b,  *104  4c2  *20c  *20d2  25d1;  viii  1  17d',  8 

23d,  9  16d\  32  5b1,  34  13a1,  41  lb1  lc1,  44  30a1  30b,  63  3a1,  88  5b, 
97  lb1;  ix  3  9b,  11  3c1,  19  5a1,  28  2b,  33  3b1,  34  2b1,  42  2b, 

59  2b1  2c1,  61  12b1,  62  9b1  20c,  65  2b  3b  20b1,  99  7b,  103  6b, 
109   21a;  x   *13  4a,  *14   15c2  ^d1,  *15  7c,   32   5d,   39   4c, 

*60  6a1,  63  2c,  64  2c2,  70  2d,  76  5a2  5b2  5c2  5d2,  77  7b,  *85  17a1, 
♦94  lb2  *7a2  *7b2  *7c2  *7d2,  110  4d  5d,  *135  4b,  *145  3b1  *3dJ, 
156  4c1,  *158  lc1  *4b',  *163  3a1  *5b\ 

1  at  end  of  dimeter  verse.  -  at  end  of  Jagati  verse.  3  §  170  iii. 

145.  Numerous  other  forms,  chiefly  those  which  contain  v, 
and  a  few  initial  syllables,  require  resolution  from  time  to  time 
provided  that  a  heavy  syllable  precedes. 

The  principal  cases  are  as  follows  : 
(i)  Resolution  of  v  in  the  endings  -dhvam,  -dhve,  -dhvai,  -sva : 
i  37  14c,  39  6a,  48  11a,  64  7d,  85  4d,  113  16a,  124  13a,  *161  8d, 
166  12d;  ii  41  17c;  iii  41  8c,  60  5d  6a;  iv  1  2a  3a,  31  4a 
11a,  32  14b;  v  55  6a  bis,  57  3d;  vi  19  3d,  48  4d ;  vii  59  4b 
6d,  *104  25a;  viii  1  23a,  47  7d,  54  2d ;  x  *87  2d,  100  10b, 

122  5b. 

After  a  light  syllable  -dhuam  appears  to  be  found  as  shewn  in 
§  151  ii. 

(ii)  Resolution  of  v  in  the  suffixes  -tva  (substantives),  -va,  -vdms 
(perfect  participle),  and  -vi. 

(a)  -tva:  ndvavdstua  vi  20  lie;  petua  vii  18  17b;  raksastud  viii 
18  13b.     For  the  gerundives  in  -tva  see  §  140  ii. 

(b)  -va  (rare):  urud  v  30  4d,  ix  87  8b;  urdhud  iv  6  2c,  [x  61  20c], 
105  9a;  kdnud  viii  2  40b,  4  20a;  1  tdnua  iii  31  2a;  2  tdnua  x  93 
15b;  3  tdnua  ix  14  4b,  78  lc :  always  in  yddua.  Much  more 
commonly  in  dsva,  where  a  heavy  syllable  is  produced  by  external  or 
internal  Sandhi :  dsva  i  175  4d,  vi  47  23a,  ix  94  5a,  x  22  5a,  39  10a; 
aghd-  i  116  6b:  ajd-  i  138  4b  4c,  vi  55  3b  4a,  58  2a,  ix  67  10a; 
rjrd-  i  100  16b  17c,  116  16b,  117  18d;  jird-  i  119  lb,  157  3b;  satd- 
viii  4  19a,  x  62  8c;  syavd-  v  61  5c,  viii  35  19b  20b  21b,  36  7a,  37  7a, 
38  8a;  sdmbhrta-  viii  34  12b. 

After  a  light  syllable  -ua,  -ud  are  found  as  shewn  in  §  151  ii. 


Feminine  case-endings  95 

(c)  -vdrhs :  ddsudms  i  407c,  150  la  (SV.  ddsivdn),  iv  2  8d,  vii  'M 
4c,  92  3a,  viii  57  4d,  71  4c;  ddsudrhs  i  127  la;  mVhudrks  i  114  3b, 
viii  25  14c,  76  7a,  ix  61  23b,  85  4d,  *113  2b,  *x  85  25c  »45a.  fa 
ii  11  5c  we  should  probably  restore  ftastambhudrhsam  (text  tastahh 
vdmsam). 

(d)  -vi  (rare):  mddhul  iv  43  5c,  [vi  63  8c],  vii  67  7b,  71  2d; 
fiwruih  x  68  12b. 

(iii)  Resolution  of  y  in  the  verbal  suffixes  -ya,  -sya :  d  'diah  (da 
'  bind ')  ii  13  9a ;  dsiat  (2  as)  iv  30  20b,  *x  72  8d,  138  4a,  dpasia  iii  24 
lb ;  drianti  (dr)  viii  16  6a;  ksesidntah  (ksi  'dwell')  ii  4  3b. 

(iv)     Resolution  of  y  v  in  the  gerunds  in  -tyd,  -tvd,  rtvl,  -yd. 

-tyd:  apitia  *ii  43  2c;  abhitid  iv  32  10c,  ix  55  4b;  Hid  x  66  14c; 
-tvd  very  frequently  in  the  Atharvaveda  ;  ~tv%:  iwstui  v  53  14c;  -yd \ 
avdsia  i  140  10c,  abhigtirid  ii  37  3c,  abhicdksid  *viii  1  34c,  nicdyid 
i  105  18c,  iii  26  la,  jiraticdksid  i  124  8b,  vicdksid  viii  13  30d,  samcdksid 
i  165  12c. 

(v)  Resolution  of  the  enclitic  tvd  is  regularly  dependent  upon  a 
preceding  heavy  syllable  :  it  occurs  i  40  lb,  45  5d,  54  5d,  58  6a,  82  3a, 
84  6c,  91  11a,  104  9a,  130  Id,  *162  15a,  187  2b;  ii  32  2d ;  iii  47 
3c,  52  6c ;  iv  *18  lib,  30  3a,  32  4b,  52  4a,  *57  6b ;  v  21  3c, 

22  3a,  26  3a,  36  5a ;  vi  21  6d,  44  lOd ;  vii  16  4a  4d ;         viii  3 

11a,  6  18a  20a,  15  12a,  23  17a,  33  8c,  45  14a,  60  16a,  65  6a,  *91  Id 
*le,  96  4a  4b  4c  4d,  102  18a;  ix  8  9a,  48  3a;  x  2  7a,  47  8a, 

*85   22b,  *137  7c,   140  6c,  *158  5a,  160  5b,  *161  5a.     So  in  i  129 
llg  it  seems  necessary  to  restore  raksohdtiam  tud  vaso. 

(vi)  There  are  several  other  instances,  chiefly  in  the  later  part  of 
the  Rigveda,  where  resolution  of  y  v  seems  to  be  due  to  a  preceding 
heavy  syllable.  Thus  we  find  anid  for  anyd  in  *vii  33  8c  (nd'niena), 
x  *14  3d  (svdhd  'nie),  91  8d  (nd  'nidm):  aridh  v  33  2d  (prd  'ri4h) :  and 
similarly  didvd  iii  46  5a,  dudrd  iv  51  2c,  siendh  iv  26  |7a,  x  144  5a, 
sudn  'dog'  *x  14  10a  *lla,  (also  *86  4c  initially),  staid  i  109  2b, 
suddanti  viii  50  5c,  suadanta  ii  1  14c,  sudhd  iii  32  15a,  ahian  ix  26  3a 
(medhdyd  'hian). 

146.  In  the  feminine  case-endings  -yai,  -yah,  -yam,  restoration 
of  i  is  very  frequently  necessary,  and  occurs  after  both  heavy  and 
light  syllables. 

This  resolution  is  found  side  by  side  with  the  forms  with  y  in  all 
parts  of  the  Rigveda,  and  occasionally  also  in  the  Atharvaveda.  See 
the  author's  Historical  Vedic  Grammar,  §  198. 

(i)  gen.  abl.  fem.  in  -idh :  drdtidh  ix  79  3a  3b;  urvidh  i  146  2c; 
iLslndrdnidh  *x  59  10c;  jivantidh  *v  78  9d;  devidh  iv  1  17b;  bhtimidh 
i  80  4a,  x  75  3a;  rdtridh  *x  129  2b;  susyantidh  *v  78  5b.  After  a 
light  syllable:  tdsidh  ii  13  la;  prthividh  i  39  *3c,  100  lb,  iii  8  3b, 
*29  4b,  viii  36  4a,  44  16b,  ix  8  8b,  31  2a,  57  4b. 

(ii)  dat.  abl.  fem.  in  -iai :  devdhiitiai  viii  39  4e ;  vispdtniai 
*ii  32  7c.     After  a  light  syllable  srutiai  ii  2  7b,  viii  96  3d,  x  111  3a; 


96  The  optative  suffix 

and   in  the  older  infinitive  forms  irddhiai  i  134  2d;   yajddkiai  viii 
39  lb;  vdhadhiai  x  22  5b;  risayddhiai  i  129  8d;  sayddhiai  ii  17  6c. 

(iii)  loc.  fem.  in  -idm  :  dsiknidm  iv  17  15a,  viii  20  25a;  ucchdntidm 
i  184  lb,  v  64  7a;  jahndvidm  iii  58  6b ;  devidm  ii  41  17b;  pdrusnidm 
v  52  9a ;  bhumidm  i  39  4b.  After  a  light  syllable  prthiviam  viii  49  7b, 
50  7b,  x  49  9b,  73  9c;  sdcidm  x  61  lb ;  sdmidm  x  31  lOd. 

There  is  one  occurrence  of  a  loc.  fem.  in  -udm,  namely  svasrudm,  for 
which  see  §  151  ii. 

147.  In  two  parts  of  the  verbal  system  we  find  occasional 
resolution  of  y  v  respectively,  occurring  after  both  heavy  and  light 
syllables,  namely  in  the  optative  suffix  -yd  and  in  the  conjuga- 
tional  suffix  -u  -nu. 

In  the  optative  resolution  appears  to  be  most  common  in  the 
bardic  hymns,  except  in  the  word  sidma,  in  which  it  becomes 
increasingly  common  in  the  normal  and  cretic  periods,  being  more 
frequent  than  sydma. 

Resolution  of  the  -nu  suffix  before  vowels  is  most  often  found 
in  the  Soma  hymns  which  we  have  attributed  to  the  normal 
period. 

The  instances  of  id-  in  the  optative  suffix  are  as  follows : 

(i)     asidm  v  64  3a,  aJidma  iv  4   14b,  uhi&amp;the  iv  56  6c,  rdhifima 

iv  10  Id,  gamidh  i  187  7d,  jagmidtam  vi  50   10a,  pupuridh  v  6  9c, 

vididtam  viii  5  37b,  msahidt  v  7  lOd  lOe  (§  169  iii). 

(ii)  sidm,  etc. :  i  17  6c1,  38  4b  4c,  120  7c  ;  iii  1  23c1,  38  9b; 
iv  41  6c ;  vi  50  9c1 ;  vii  34  21b1 ;  viii  14  lc  2c,  19  25b1  26d1, 
44  23b,  70  5b2;         x  20  8b. 

(iii)  sidma:  i  *24  15d,  51  15d,  73  8b,  94  13c  15d,  98  la,  121  15d, 
150  3c,  *164  40b,  180  9d ;  ii  2  12a,  11   lb1  12d  13a1,  18  8d,  24 

15b,    27  16d,  28  2a,  38   lOd;  iii  1   21d,  30  18c,  39  7b  8b,   55 

22c,  59  3d;  iv  8  5a,  16  21d,  17  9d,  41   10b,   50  6d,   51    lie, 

56  4d;  v  4  8c,  6  8c,  31   13d,  42  17a,  45  lie,  53  Hd1  15c,  54 

13b,  55  lOd,  62  9d,  65  5b1,  70  2c;  vi  19  13b,  47  12d  13b,  52  5a, 

71   2b  6d;  vii   1   20c,  4   4d  7b,    14  3c,   17  7a,   18  3d1,   19  7d2, 

34  24d  25c,  37  4c,  40  Id1,  41  3d  4a  4d  5b,  48  2a,  52  la,  54  2c,  56  24d, 
60    lc,    66    13d1,   87    7b,   92   4c;  viii    40    12d,   *48    12d    *13d, 

53  7b;  ix  86  38d,  89  7d,  95  5d ;  x  *14  6d,  22  12d,  29  2b, 

31  Id,  36  12c,  38  2c1,  64  lie,  66  12a1,  *121  lOd,  126  4dJ,  131  6d  7b, 
132  2d2,  148  3c. 

1  beginning  the  verse.  2  after  a  light  syllable. 

Resolved  values  are  found  in  the  suffix  -u  -nu  as  follows :  tanu- 
iv  45  2d  6b;  dhanu-  iii  53  4d,  ix  75  5a,  77  3b,  79  la,  97  3c  16d  17c 
18d  19b  20c  26b,  105  4b;  dhunu-  vi  47  17c;  srnu-  iii  20  lc,  [v  41 
12c]  ;  sunu-  v  30  6b ;  hinu-  viii  1  19d.     Similarly  ksnavdmi  §  151  i. 

So  too  in  the  noun  dhdnvan  and  its  derivatives,  i  35  8b,  168  5c, 
vi  12  5d. 


Initial  consonant-groups  07 

148.  In  several  words  occasional  resolution  of  y  and  v  is 
required  where  one  of  these  is  the  second  element  in  an  initial 
consonant-group.  The  syllabic  value  does  not  appear  to  be 
dependent  upon  the  position  in  the  verse. 

The  more  important  instances  are  : 

(i)  jyti  'strength':  jidydn  iii  38  5a,  vi  30  4b,  x  50  5a;  paramajidh2, 
viii  1  30c. 

(ii)  tva  'several':  tua-  i  147  2c2,  *iv  18  2d  bis,  *x  71  4c  *lla  *llc, 
*72  9c. 

(iii)  tvdm  'thou':  tudya  i  53  lie,  102  4a2,  ix  85  8d2,  *x  84  4c; 
tudt :  i  84  6a;  iii  14  6a1;  iv  11  3a1  3b1  3c1  4a1  4c1  4dx;  v  25  7c2 
7dJ;  vi  7  3a1  3b1,  13  la1,  31  2a1;  vii  5  3a1,  11  lb,  21  3c1;  viii  24 
lib1  12a  15b,  97  14c1;       x  *18  13a,  91  8d,  *98  2b1,  112  9c. 

(iv)     div  'sky':    diaidi  i  8  5c1,  52  10a1,  65  3b,  89  4b;  ii  4 

6d! ;  iii  6  3a1;  iv  1  lOd1,  21  Id1,  22  4b1;  v  41  lid1;  vi  36 
5b1,  50  13d1,  51  5a1,  68  4a1;  vii  7  5c1;  viii  7  26c1,  20  6a,  56  lc\ 
*100  12b1;  ix  86  9b1;  x  36  2a1,  44  8b1,  45  8d,  *59  3b1,  *85 

lb  *7c'  *10b\  132  la  6b1;  didm  (or  dydam  §  142  ii)  i  52  lid1,  67 
5b2,  141  8b1,  174  3b1,  ii  17  5d,  iv  22  3d,  vii  3  3c,  *x  16  3b1. 

(v)     dvih  '  twice ' :  duih  i  53  9a,  vi  66  2b1,  *x  120  3b1. 

(vi)     si  'bind':  vi  sia-  iii  4  9b,  [v  45  la],  ix  95  5b,  x  30  lie. 

(vii)  syd  'that':  sid-  vi  65  la,  vii  8  2a  (after  fu  §  160),  75  4a, 
80  2a;  tid-  i  30  22a,  37  11a1,  52  la1,  88  5a,  187  4a2;  v  32  3a1  4a1 
5a1    6a'  8a1,  33   10a2;  vi   2  9a,   27   4a,  44   4a1   16a;  vii    75 

3a :  viii  10  3a1,  64  5a1,  67  la1,  92  7a1,  94  10a1  11a1  12a1;  ix  111 
2a;         x[26  2a2],  138  6a,  178  la1. 

(viii)  svd  '  his ' :  sua-  i  1  8c,  58  2a,  75  5c2,  94  14a,  119  8b ;  ii  2 
lid,  4  7b2,  5  7a1  7a ;  iii  10  2d1,  53  8dJ;  iv  16  10c1;  v  4  6b, 

[41  9b1],  48  3c,  58  7b,  64  5c1,  87  4c;  vi  3  8b,  *28  2b2,  40  5b,  41  lc, 
44  22c,  *75  19a;  vii  36  5b,  82  6b;  viii  2  7c1,  11  10c1,  18  13c1, 
44  12b,  79  9a1;  x  8  4d,  *18  lb,  23  4a,  54  3d,  56  2d  *6c1  *7c\  74 

2d2,  *83  5d',  *85  42d,  105  10c,  118  lc1,  *124  2d1,  144  3b2. 

1  beginning  the  verse.  2  after  a  light  syllable. 

149.  As  the  suffix  -ya  regularly  becomes  -ia  after  a  heavy 
syllable,  and  -va  occasionally  becomes  -ua,  there  is  no  antecedent 
improbability  in  the  restoration  of  -ara  for  -ra,  -ana  for  -na  under 
the  same  circumstances.  There  are  in  fact  a  number  of  passages 
in  which  such  restoration  is  probable :  but  if  we  consider  the  two 
words  for  which  this  step  most  readily  suggests  itself,  indra  and 
rudrd,  it  is  clear  that  it  is  attended  with  special  difficulty.  In 
the  case  of  indra  the  restoration  is  almost  always  suggested  in  a 
single  position,  viz.  immediately  after  an  early  caesura,  and  a  very 
large  proportion  of  the  instances  are  in  decasyllabic  hymns,  so 
that  an  alternative  metrical  interpretation  is  suggested :  whereas 

a.  7 


98  Supposed  resolution  of  the  suffix  -ra 

in  the  case  of  rudrd  the  usual  condition  for  restoration,  a  pre- 
ceding heavy  syllable,  is  not  found.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
number  of  occurrences  in  which  restoration  is  suggested  is  re- 
latively so  small  in  all  words  of  this  class  that  we  can  hardly 
think  of  such  forms  as  indara  (indrra)  or  rudard  as  the  primitive 
forms.  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  consider  these  two  words 
separately.  As  before,  instances  which  can  be  alternative! y  ex- 
plained as  decasyllabic  verses,  if  they  occur  in  decasyllabic  hymns, 
are  enclosed  in  square  brackets. 

(i)  indra  (a)  after  early  caesura:  i  33  14a,  53  11a,  [63  la  to  9a], 
89  6a,  100  17a,  [104  2a  8a,  129  la  4a  7f  8b],  130  2a,  133  6a,  165 
3a,  [167  la  10a,  169  la  to  5a,  173  5a  7c  10b  11a  13a,  174  la  to  10a], 
177  5a,  [178  la  to  4a],  186  6c;  ii  17  8d,  [19  3a  8c,  20  4a  5b 

6a  7a],  31  3a  ;  iii  32  12a,  49  la ;  iv   16  21a,  17  la,  19  la  2b, 

[21  10a],  24  2b,  39  4d,  50  11a;  v  [33  4a  5a],  36  la;  vi  [20  3b 
11a  13a,  21  2a  8a],  22  3a  10a,  23  3a,  [24  la  10b],  25  lb,  26  7b,  [33 
la,  35  2a  3a],  44  15a,  47  9a;  vii  19  2a  6a,  20  2a,  21  5a  6a,  22 

la  8c,  23  5a,  25  la,  29  la.  30  lb  4a;  viii   66  5c,  96  20a,  97 

14a;  ix   88   la;  x   [22   la  2a  +lla  12a  13a  15a,  23   la], 

29  3a,  [49  11a,  50  2b  3a  4a,  61  22a,  93  11a],  *139  4c,  [148  la 
2a  4a  5a].         indram&amp;dana  vii  92  4a. 

(b)  elsewhere  in  Trimeter  verse :  i  62  3a,  130  10c ;  [ii  20  2a] ;  iii  53 
24a ;      iv  16  15a ;      vi  26  la ;      vii  37  4a  ;      viii  90  6c ;      *x  180  3a. 

(c)  in  Dimeter  verse :    viii  2  7a,  x  22  7a,  105  4a  (probably). 

The  extreme  rarity  of  the  form  in  dimeter  verse,  in  spite  of  the 
great  number  of  Indra  hymns  in  Groups  I  and  II  in  dimeter  and  lyric 
metres,  seems  to  shew  clearly  that  the  word  was  always  a  disy liable 
to  the  poets  of  those  groups.  The  immense  majority  of  the  occurrences 
being  in  Group  III,  where  the  decasyllabic  variation  prevails,  the 
verses  can  most  readily  be  explained  as  decasyllabic,  especially  as  even 
in  this  group  such  convenient  forms  as  indarasya,  indaraya  would  be 
are  never  found  in  trimeter  cadence.  Hence  the  first  real  evidence 
for  resolution  occurs  in  the  Vasistha  hymns,  where  there  are  twelve 
instances. 

(ii)     rudrd  :    i  100  5a,  114  4a  6b  8c  ;  ii  33  13  times  ;  iv  3 

6d ;         v  46  2c,  [51  13d] ;  *vi  28  7d ;         *vii  35  6c,  36  5d,  46  2d 

4a;         x  92  9a,  126  5c. 

The  restoration  is  necessary,  and  can  most  easily  be  explained  as 
an  imitation  of  that  of  indra :  it  is  almost  confined  to  the  normal  and 
cretic  periods,  and  is  generally  found  after  a  late  caesura. 

(iii)  suffixes  -ra,  -rd,  -ri,  almost  always  after  the  caesura,  and 
generally  in  decasyllabic  hymns:  omdtrd  [x  50  5b];  candrd  [i  135  4f]; 
tuvimdtrd  viii  81  '?c  (dimeter) ;  tvdstrd  x  76  3c ;  ddtrd  iv  38  la,  [vi  20 
7d] ;  patrd  i  121  la,  vi  44  16a,  [x  50  6c,  105  10c] ;  bhrdtrd  iv  23  6b; 
mantra  [x  50  4d  6d]  ;  mandrd  vii  9  2c  ;  rdstrd  iv  42  la,  vii  84  2a ; 
raudra  [x  61    la  15a];  vdsrd  [x  99  lb];  srotra  *x  85  lie  (dimeter); 


Resolution  of  nasatya  and  aditya  99 

sutrdtrd  [vi  68  7a];  stotrd  [x  105  la],     hotrd  [i  122  9d,  129  7a],  iv  2 
10c,  48  la  (dimeter),  vii  60  9a.     netrii  92  7a,  113  4a. 

After  a  light  syllable  only  rjrd :  see  §  151  ii. 

Half  of  the  instances  are  in  decasyllabic  hymns,  and  therefore  open 
to  question.  But  the  fact  that  almost  all  possible  occurrences  follow  a 
heavy  syllable  favours  the  view  that,  in  the  later  periods  at  least, 
resolution  occasionally  took  place. 

(iv)  The  suffixes  -na,  -nas  may  be  read  with  resolution  in  the  case 
of  cyautnd  vi  47  2c,  [x  50  4c],  and  reknah  i  121  5c,  [vi  20  7c,  x  61 
lie,  132  3b].  Both  examples  are  doubtful:  but  the  occurrence  of 
nutna,  nutana  in  the  text  in  agreement  with  the  metre  shews  at  least 
the  possibility  of  the  former  resolution. 

150.  In  connexion  with  these  restorations  it  seems  best  to 
consider  the  proposed  restoration  of  ndasatyd  for  nasatya.  In  all  cases 
the  normal  number  of  syllables  may  also  be  obtained  by  the  restora- 
tion ndsatid  :  and  the  rhythm  is  sometimes  favourable  to  one,  sometimes 
to  the  other  form.  On  the  whole  it  seems  probable  that  both  forms 
occur,  but  there  is  little  reason  to  consider  that  either  is  a  primitive 
form.     Most  of  the  instances  follow  an  early  caesura. 

(i)  ndasatyd  is  metrically  preferable :  i  34  9d,  116  2c  9a  10a  lib 
13a  14b  16c  17d  19b  20c  22c  23b,  117  Id  6b  lid  13d  23c,  118  4d 
lib,  [173  4d],  180  9d,  182  4d  8a,  183  3c  5d,  184  lc  3b  5d ;  ii  41 
7a;  iv  3  6c,  43  7d,  44  4b ;  v  74  2b;  vi  11  lc,  49  5c,  [63  lc 
4d  7b  10a] ;  vii  39  4d,  70  6a,  71  4c,  72  la  2b  3d;  viii  5  32c 
35c,  9  9a,  25  10b,  26  2b,  57  lc  4b,  85  la  9a,  101  7c;  x  39  3c, 
41   2a. 

(ii)  ndsatid  is  metrically  preferable :  i  20  3a,  47  9a ;  iv  37  8b ; 
viii  8  15a,  9  15a,  19  16b;  x  73  4b :  and  indra-ndsatid  viii  26  8b. 

The  case  of  ddityd  is  exactly  similar,  except  that  the  occasions  for 
restoration  are  relatively  fewer  : 

(i)  aadityd  is  metrically  preferable:  *i  24  15c,  ii  1  13a,  29  la, 
iii  54  20c. 

(ii)     dditid  is  metrically  preferable:    i  45  lb,  ii  27  6c,  viii  18  2b. 

151.  In  several  forms  and  a  large  number  of  individual  words 
syllabic  restoration  is  suggested  by  the  metre  in  one  or  more 
passages,  but  not  with  sufficient  frequency  to  constitute  proof.  In 
the  instances  that  follow  restoration  is  sufficiently  probable  to 
make  it  undesirable  to  treat  the  verses  concerned  as  metrically 
irregular. 

(i)     Restoration  in  place  of  a  long  vowel  or  diphthong  : 

-at  in  abl.  sing,  of  -a  nouns  :  antdriksaat  *x  158  lb ;  caritraat  *viii 

48  5c;  pardstaat  vi  54  10a;  pardkdat  i  30  21b,  viii  5  31a,  x  22  6c ; 

sadhdsthaat  viii  11  7b. 

-dr  in  2  3  sing,  of  the  s  aorist :  dksaah  ix  18  lb,  66  28a,  98  2d  3a, 

107  9a  9b;  bhadh  i  128  2g.     Similarly  bhaak  viii  80  8a. 

7—2 


100  Miscellaneous  resolutions 

-dr  in  monosyllabic  noun-stems:  vdr  'water':  vdah  iv  19  4b,  viii 
98  8a;  vdr  'protector':  vdah  [x  93  3b]. 

arksd  (proper  name):    a-arkse  viii  68   16b. 

aurvd-  (proper  name):    a-urvabhrguvdt  viii  102  4a. 

ksoni  (proper  name1?):    ksavani  [i  173  7c],  *x  95  9b. 

hsbdah  '  stream ' :    ksdvadah  vi  1 7   1 2a. 

ksnu  'wipe  out':    ksnavdmi  x  23  2d. 

ddsa  'barbarian':  ddasa  [i  104  2c],  vi  26  5c,  [x  23  2d,  49  6b  7d] ; 
ddasl  [ii  20  7b,  vi  20  10d]. 

dura  'far':    duurd  iv  20  la,  *x  108   11a. 

nu  'now':  the  restoration  nuu  is  an  alternative  to  nu  u,  the  reading 
suggested  in  §  124. 

pur  'burg':   puuh  i  189  2c,  vii  15  14c. 

mam  'me':  mdam  iv  42  5a  5b,  *v  40  7a,  *vii  50  la,  viii  74  14a, 
ix  67  25c,  x  48  lc,  49  2a,  *52  4a,  *145  6c. 

yds  'tire':  aydas  [i  167  4a,  vi  66  5c]. 

reknah:   rdyiknah  vii  40  2c,  viii  46  15a,  x   132  3c. 

vdtdpya(!):    vaatdpya  i  121   8d,  ix  93  5b,  x  105   lc. 

vdm  'you':  vaam  iv  42  9a,  v  64  2c,  74  10c  lOd,  vi  59  2a,  viii  5  29a, 
*x  167  4c. 

vi  'bird':    vaydh  (gen.  s.)  i  130  3b,  vi  48   17d. 

sura  'lord':    Mura  i  122   lOd,  [173  5b]. 

sura  'sun':  suura  or  suria  i  71  9b,  [122  15d,  149  3c],  vi  48  17c, 
51  2d,  ix  111  lc. 

stu  'praise':   stavisam  i  187   la;    astaut  vii  42  6b. 

sprdh  'strive':    spuurdhdn  vi  67  9a;    spuurdhdse  v  64  4d. 

(ii)     Resolution  of  y,  v,  r. 

rjrd:    rjard  i   117   14d,  rjarasua  i   100   16b. 

ji-  'conquer':  jigiuh  viii  19   18c;    cf.  jidydn,  §  148  i. 

tu  'be  strong':    samtdvituat  iv  40  4c. 

tva:  tud  after  a  light  syllable:  iii  23  4a,  x  160  5d :  initially 
*i  191   10f=llf=12f. 

dyut  'shine':  diutandm  vi  15  4a;  diotanah  viii  29  2a;  su-diotma 
i  141  12a,  -diotmdnam  [ii  4  la]. 

-dhuam  after  a  light  syllable :    i  87  2a,  viii  7  2b  14b,  20  18d. 

mahimdn  'power':    mahind  iv  2   lc. 

-ya  (verb-suffix)  after  light  syllables :    fjiantah  vi  37   2b  3c. 

-ya  (noun-suffix)  exceptionally  after  light  syllables:  ajurid  vi  17 
13b;  dtia  ii  34  3a  13c,  ix  76  lc,  80  3d,  85  5c,  93  Id;  arid  iv  1  7d ; 
gdvia  i  131  3b,  *v  30  15a,  52  17d,  sugdvia  *i  162  22a;  ndvia  'young' 
v  29  15b,  viii  11  10b  ;  ninid  i  95  4a,  iv  3  16b,  x  5  lc ;  bhavia  i  129 
6a,  *x  90  2b;  mdria  i  77  3a;  vasavid  (see  §  135)  vi  60  lc,  x  74  3d. 

-yah  (ending  of  i-  nouns):  aridh  iv  48  lb,  vi  14  3b,  vii  8  la. 

-yd  (noun- suffix)  exceptionally  after  light  syllables :  kulid  x  43  7b, 
pddid  *x  102  7d,  sravasid  ii  19  7b. 

-yuh  (ending  of  i-  nouns) :    sdkhiuh  viii  69  7d,  x  3  4b. 

-va  (noun-suffix)  after  a  light  syllable:  dsua  i  175  4d,  vi  63  7a, 
viii  5  35b,   26  24  c. 

var,  vr  'choose':    avari  iv  55  5b. 

-vah  in  the  u  declension:  mddhuah  (gen.  sing.)  ix  24  7b,  (nom.  pi.) 
ix  89  3a. 


Miscellaneous  restorations  101 

-vd  (noun-suffix)  after  a  light  syllable:  apud  *x  103  12b,  dtmd 
*i  162   19a. 

-va  (instrum.  masc.) :   krdtud  iv  28  3c,  vi  12  4c. 

-vdm  (loc.  fern,  sing.):    svasrudm  *x  85  46b. 

-ve  (dat.  sing.):    sahdsrabdhue  viii  45  26b. 

(iii)     Miscellaneous  syllabic  restorations  : 

abhi :  loss  of  initial  a  is  not  improbable  in  'bhydvartim  vi  27  5b, 
'bhisrindnn  ix  97  43c  :  cf.  bhisdj  for  abhisdj. 

avaydj :    avayajah  i  173   12b.      Cf.  svaraj  below. 

dsveya  (in  Aufrecht's  text  only):    dsvyena  *x  87   16b. 

cfs&amp;ra  :    restore  dsakrdh  vii  43  5b. 

iyam:  yam  i  186  11a,'  vii  66  8b  8c,  86  4d,  viii  1  26c,  *x  129  6b, 
*135  7c. 

iva:    va  see  above  §§  128,   129. 

ukthd :  ucdtha  v  4  7a,  [vi  24  7d],  viii  2  30b,  x  24  2a. 

uttardttdt :   uttardt  x  36   14  b. 

kvd:  ku  i  38  2c,  v  61  la  (1),  2a  bis:  but  in  v  74  la  read  kua  for  kd. 

tvdm:    tdva  for  te  *x  10  13  b. 

ddma :    for  dame  read  ddma  d  ii  1   7d. 

(few :    for  devdndm  read  devan  vi  51   2b. 

pascattdt  :  pas'cdt  x  36   14a. 

prthivi:  prthvi  i  67  5a,  *191  6a,  *v  83  9d,  vii  34  7b,  99  3d,  viii  79 
4b.  prthvi  is  rightly  given  in  the  text  vi  12  5b.  The  restoration  is 
also  metrically  advantageous,  but  uncertain,  in  the  following  passages  : 
i  33  10a,  iii  14  Id,  vi  19  12c,  vii  3  4a,  x  168  Id,  *173  4a. 

pauruseya:  paurusyena  *x  87   16a. 

brhdcehravas:  brhdcchravdh  x  66  la. 

brhaspdti:  brdhmanaspdti  *x  103  8a. 

bhiyds:  bhydsam  ii  28  6a,  ix  19  6b:  cf.  bhisd. 

mdrta:  mdrtia  i  38  4b,  63  5b,  73  8a,  77  2c ;  ii  23  7b;  vi  15 
8c,  16  46a ;  vii  4  3b,  25  2b,  100  la;  viii  11  4b,  71  7c;  ix  94 
3c;         x  63  13a,  115  7a,  118  6a. 

mahimdn:  for  mahna  read  mahimnd  vi  66  5c. 

rdtha:  the  stem  rdthas  is  to  be  restored  in  rdthasas  pdtih  v  50  5b, 
x  64  10c,  93  7b :  rdthas  or  a  locative  rathe  in  ratha-ulha  x  148  3d. 

rodasi:  for  rodasyoh  in  i  151  3a,  168  lc  read  rodasoh,  which  appears 
in  the  text  ix  22  5a:  otherwise  rodasioh  or  perhaps  rbdasioh  (§  173  ii). 

sucidan  :  read  sucidantah  vii  4  2c. 

s'mdsru:  smdsdru  v  7  7c,  [x  23  lc],  cf.  x  96  8a. 

sahasdvan:  read  sahdvan  i  91  23b. 

sdhlyas  :  for  sdhiyase  i  71  4c  read  sdhyase. 

sddh:  for  sadhantah  read  sddhdyantah  x  74  3c. 

sdnu,  snu:  both  forms  are  found  in  the  Rigveda;  read  sdnubhih 
vii  88  3c. 

sumdd,  smdd:  both  forms  are  found  in  the  Rigveda;  it  is  advan- 
tageous to  read  sumdd  vii  3  8d,  [x  61  8b]  and  sumddudhnlh  i  73  6b, 
but  smdd  *i  162  7a. 

stu :  for  stdvante  read  staunte  vi  26  7c  :  for  stavdma  stavd  ii  11  6b. 

svd  :  for  svdsya  read  suydvasd  ii  4  4a :  cf.  ii  27  1 2b  1 3a. 

svan  :  for  svdnit  read  svauista  ii  4  6b :  cf.  svar. 

svar  :  for  asvdrstdm  read  asvaristam  ii  11  7b. 


102  Glosses  and  compounds 

svardj :  for  svardt  read  svardjdh  vii  82  2a,  viii  46  28a,  *x  15  14c: 
«»  adhirdjd  *x  128  9d. 

svdvas:  read  su-dvan  in  the  Pp.  text,  vi  47  12a  13c. 

/«i  'incite':    for  hiydnd  read  hydnd  viii  49  5b,  ix  13  6a,  86  3a, 


98  2d. 

152.  Lastly  we  may  advert  to  two  kinds  of  syllabic  restoration 
which  border  upon  the  sphere  of  ordinary  textual  criticism,  namely, 
the  appearance  in  the  Rigveda  text  of  glosses  and  of  resolved 
forms  and  derivatives  from  dvandva  compounds. 

(i)  Where  a  verse  includes  too  many  syllables  it  is  a  ready 
method  to  throw  out  some  word  as  having  been  added  as  an  aid 
to  intelligence  or  devotion,  as  the  words  in  brackets  in  the  following 
verses : 

sdm  bhdsmand  [vdyund]  veviddnah  v  19  5b. 

prayati  yajiie  [agninij  adhvare  dadhidhvam  vi  10   lb. 

purvis  te  [indra]  upamdtayah  viii  40  9a. 

Probable  instances  of  glosses  or  other  additions  to  the  text  are 
to  be  found  in     i  129   llg  (jijanat);         ii   11   6a  [indra);  iv   1 

2a  (ague);  v  19  5b  {vdyund) ;  vi  10  lb  (agnim) ;  vii  41  6d 

(dsvdh),  82  2a  (vdm) ;  viii  29  5b  (sucih),  39  6b  (apiciam),  40  6c 

(vdsu),  9a  (indra),  46  17c  (visvdmanusdm),  31c  (ddha),  103  5a  (vajam); 
*ix  113  3b  {tarn) ;  *x  10  12a  (tanvdm),  20  2a  (dgnim),  78  8a 

(devdh),  *85  34a  (kdtukam  etdd),  *87  13c  (mdnyoh),  93  14c  (pdnca), 
*121  7c  (ekah),  *128  9c  (adUytih),  150  4a  {devdh),  *164  5c  (pdpdh). 

(ii)  In  the  Rigveda  we  find  dvandva  compounds  in  process  of 
formation,  and  therefore  not  only  declined  irregularly,  but  also 
used  as  bases  for  derivatives  in  lax  combination. 

The  text  of  the  Rigveda  rightly  records  such  forms  in  the  following 
passages : 

pataydn-    mandaydtsakham    (i.e.    pataydtsakham    utd    mandaydt- 

sakham)         i  4  7c 
dmrta-  mdrtidnaam  (i.e.  dmrtdndm  ca  mdrtidnam  ca)         i  26  9b 
mitrd-    utd   medhid-   Hithim    (i.e.   mitratithim   utd   medhidtithim) 

i  36   17c. 
In  other  passages  the  Samhita  editor  has  given  both  words  in  full, 
thereby  destroying  the  metre  :  so  that  we  need  to  restore  as  follows  : 
prd  tuvidyumnd-  sthdvirasya  ghfsveh 

(text  tuvidyumndsya  sthdvirasya)         vi  18  12a 
mitrdvdrun-d-  utd  dhdrmavantd 

(text  mitravdrunavantd  utd  dhdrmavantd)  viii  35   13a 

utd  me  prayi-  vayiyoh  (text  prayiyoh  vayiyoh)         viii   19  37a 
prdti-ardhim  devd-  devasya  mahnd 

(text  devasya  devasya)         x  1   5c  (so  probably  in  5b  also). 
pavdkd-  sukrdvarcdh  (text  pdvakdvarcdh  sukrdvarcdh)        x  140  2a. 


History  of  syllabic  change  103 

153.  The  history  of  the  changes  discussed  in  this  chapter 
appears  to  be  as  follows. 

In  the  earliest  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  namely  Groups  I— III,  an 
additional  syllable  must  frequently  be  restored  in  the  flexion  of 
monosyllabic  root-stems,  and  in  the  genitive  plural  ending.  In 
the  later  groups  this  restoration  decreases  rapidly  in  frequency, 
except  that  the  fuller  form  of  the  genitive  plural  remains  much 
longer  in  common  use  in  dimeter  cadence  than  the  other  forms. 

Syllabic  restoration  of  accented  y  v,  of  some  -ya  suffixes  after 
light  syllables,  and  of  all  after  heavy  syllables,  of  v  in  tvdm, 
tvdin,  etc.,  and  of  y  v  r  n  before  certain  vocalic  case-endings,  is 
the  rule  throughout  the  Rigveda:  but  in  the  popular  Rigveda 
exceptions  increase  in  number. 

In  the  noun-endings  in  -bhyam,  -bhyah,  the  noun-suffixes 
containing  v,  the  gerunds  in  -tva,  -tv%,  -ya,  and  the  enclitic  tva, 
resolved  forms  following  heavy  syllables  are  fairly  common  in  all 
parts  of  the  Rigveda. 

In  the  noun-endings  in  -yai,  -yah,  -yam,  the  verbal  suffix  -nv 
from  -nu,  the  optative  suffix  ya-,  and  in  some  initial  syllables 
resolution  is  not  uncommon,  but  tends  on  the  whole  to  become 
rarer  in  the  later  parts  of  the  Rigveda. 

The  use  of  indra  after  the  caesura  in  decasyllabic  verse 
changed  to  a  conventional  use  of  a  form  indara  in  the  same 
position  after  the  disappearance  of  that  metre :  and  other  reso- 
lutions of  the  suffixes  -ra  and  -na  were  occasionally  employed, 
following  the  same  model,  and  restricted  to  the  same  position  in 
the  verse. 

Resolved  forms  of  the  words  ndsatya,  adityd  were  also  occa- 
sionally employed,  chiefly  after  the  caesura :  but  the  nature  of  the 
resolution  is  uncertain  in  each  case. 

Outside  the  limits  described  the  resolution  of  long  vowels, 
diphthongs,  and  semivowels  is  rare  and  uncertain :  but  there  are 
indications  that  the  text  is  not  entirely  to  be  relied  upon  either 
in  these  points  or  in  its  reckoning  of  the  number  of  syllables  in 
other  ways  in  a  number  of  individual  words. 

Generally,  the  consideration  of  these  changes  supports  the 
view  that  Groups  I-III  together  form  the  earliest  part  of  the 
Rigveda,  and  that  otherwise  the  general  arrangement  described 
in  §§  57-63  holds  good. 

As  these  results  confirm  those  reached  in  the  last  chapter,  we 


104  History  of  syllabic  change 

are  entitled  to  make  a  further  provisional  division  of  the  hymns 
of  the  bardic  period  into  (i)  hymns  of  the  archaic  period,  corre- 
sponding to  Groups  I— III,  and  (ii)  hymns  of  the  strophic  period, 
corresponding  to  Groups  IV  and  V. 

The  consideration  of  the  Table  in  §  155  will  enable  us  to  justify 
these  conclusions  in  detail.  The  Table  is  drawn  out  so  as  to  call 
attention  to  those  features  which  seem  to  be  instructive :  in  many 
particulars  the  number  of  instances  is  so  few  that  they  give  no 
practical  guidance.  By  taking  the  numbers  for  the  periods  instead 
of  the  groups  we  are  able  to  adopt  a  larger  unit  of  bulk,  namely  5000 
trimeter  verses  =  7500  dimeter  verses,  without  departing  much  from 
the  actual  facts.  Where  the  figures  are  reckoned  separately  for 
trimeter  and  dimeter  verses  we  take  5000  of  each  as  the  standard 
of  bulk. 

The  whole  number  of  variations  with  which  we  have  to  deal  is 
nearly  2600,  which  corresponds  very  fairly  with  the  number  of  Sandhi 
variations  (§  131):  of  these  nearly  900  are  resolutions  of  long  vowels 
and  diphthongs,  700  irregular  consonantal  values  of  y  and  v,  800 
irregular  resolutions  of  y  and  v,  and  200  resolutions  of  r  and  n.  The 
Indian  tradition,  which  lays  stress  only  on  the  resolution  of  ;//  and  v, 
has  therefore  failed  to  grasp  the  true  proportions  of  the  phenomena, 
and  so  far  exercises  a  misleading  influence  on  modern  criticism.  We 
take  up  the  different  sections  in  the  order  just  given,  thus  bringing 
them  into  line  with  the  discussion  of  Sandhi. 

(i)     Resolution  of  long  vowels  and  diphthongs. 

(a)  In  the  forms  derived  from  radical  root-stems  the  progress  of 
contraction  is  very  uniform,  but  is  not  complete  even  in  the  popular 
Rigveda  :  indeed  the  Atharvaveda  still  shews  the  nom.  sing,  in  -aah 
quite  commonly  (Historical  Vedic  Grammar,  §  175).  Forms  from  stems 
in  -i  and  -it  are  not,  as  a  rule,  contracted  even  in  classical  Sanskrit ; 
consequently  it  appears  to  be  matter  of  accident  that  such  forms  as 
bhut  dhve  appear  in  our  text  side  by  side  with  bhuvat  dhuve.  The 
parallel  of  the  Greek  flexional  forms  with  hiatus  goes  to  shew  that  we 
have  on  the  whole  a  genuine  historical  developement. 

(b)  For  the  genitive  plural  in  -am  we  find  in  Groups  I  to  III  that 
rather  more  than  half  of  the  occurrences  of  -aam  are  at  the  end  of 
dimeter  verse :  but  this  lends  no  great  support  to  the  view  that  the 
measurement  had  its  origin  in  the  constraining  of  catalectic  dimeter 
verses  into  a  normal  measurement.  In  the  later  periods  the  use  of  the 
ending  -aam  in  dimeter  cadence  has  clearly  become  a  convention,  and 
no  longer  corresponds  to  the  ordinary  pronunciation  :  but  in  the  pre- 
Vedic  period  the  two  forms  must  have  been  at  least  equally  common  : 
and  though  the  longer  form  is  not  necessarily  the  earlier,  yet  for  our 
present  purpose  it  must  be  considered  a  real  archaism. 

(ii)     Irregular  consonantal  values  of  y  and  v. 
Where  the  syllabic  value  of  y  and   v  is  the  more  common,  the 
presumption  must  be  that  this  is  the  original  form  :  and  it  would  then 
appear  that  any  tendency  to  contraction  worked  more  slowly  if  a  heavy 


History  of  syllabic  change  105 

syllable  preceded.  This  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  Sandhi, 
where  we  find  original  -i  -u  retained  before  dissimilar  vowels  throughout 
the  Rigveda  proper,  the  exceptions  being  almost  always  in  cases  where 
a  light  syllable  precedes.  The  differentiation  thus  depending  upon  the 
previous  syllable  might  clearly  lead  to  the  resolution  of  original  y  v 
where  they  follow  heavy  syllables,  and  it  may  be  that  a  few  such  cases 
are  included  in  this  section. 

It  is  remarkable  that  contraction  seems  to  be  equally  common  in 
all  parts  of  the  Rigveda  proper,  not  only  in  these  words  as  a  whole, 
but  in  single  words  which  are  particularly  common,  such  as  tvdm  and 
siirya.  I  find  some  difficulty  in  thinking  that  these  forms  were  really 
established  as  common  variants  so  early,  and  am  therefore  inclined  to 
distrust  the  text.  Since  single  passages  in  the  Rigveda  have  retained 
for  us  such  old  forms  as  ku  and  rodasoh,  usually  written  kva  and 
rodasyoh,  it  seems  not  improbable  that  an  old  nominative  td  may  be 
concealed  in  many  cases  under  the  tvdm  of  the  archaic  period,  and 
that  the  order  of  developement  was  tu,  tudm,  tvdm.  In  the  case  of 
surya  the  doublet  sura  (p.  36)  is  sufficiently  common  in  the  Rigveda, 
as  mdrta  by  the  side  of  mdrtia  :  it  is  therefore  likely  enough  that  &amp;&amp;ra 
stood  originally  in  many  passages  where  surya  is  now  read,  the  order 
of  developement  being  sUra,  suria,  surya.  Similarly  the  frequency  of 
such  forms  as  the  instrumental  masc.  in  -id,  -ua,  and  the  corresponding 
datives  -ie,  -ue  may  be  concealed  from  us  under  the  later  forms  -ind, 
-una,  -aye,  -ave.  It  is  possible  that  a  similar  history  underlies  other 
forms. 

(iii)     Irregular  resolution  of  y  and  v. 

(a)  The  history  of  the  enclitic  tva  is  the  clearest  proof  of  the  real 
occurrence  of  resolution  of  original  v  due  to  a  preceding  heavy  syllable. 
Although  this  change  as  a  whole  is  of  equal  importance  in  all  parts  of 
the  Rigveda,  it  is  not  necessarily  so  in  each  separate  class;  the  values 
-bhiah,  -bhidm  seem  to  be  distinctly  increasing  in  frequency  throughout 
the  Rigveda,  and  the  gerund  ending  -tud  is  quite  common  in  the 
Atharvaveda  though  not  found  in  any  part  of  the  Rigveda. 

(6)  The  feminine  case-endings  in  -yai,  -yah,  -yam,  the  optative 
in  -yd  and  the  verbal-suffix  -nu  before  vowels  shew  only  occasional 
vocalisation :  in  the  optative  forms  (except  siama)  this  is  not  found 
later  than  the  normal  period.  In  the  case  of  the  verbal- suffix  -u  would 
seem  to  be  primitive,  and  this  may  be  the  case  also  with  the  other  forms. 

(c)  With  regard  to  the  initial  groups  it  is  at  least  clear  that  such 
forms  as  tudya  and  tudt  have  a  different  history  from  tvdm  and  tvdm, 
in  which  the  vowel  values  predominate.  In  this  case  it  seems  probable 
that  the  original  v  cases  have  been  slightly  influenced  by  the  u  cases. 
A  large  proportion  of  all  the  instances  follow  heavy  syllables,  but  there 
are  so  many  instances  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse  that  it  seems  very 
doubtful  whether  this  is  really  a  cause  of  the  resolution.  The  form 
siama  and  the  word  tua  shew  progressive  vocalisation :  in  the  other 
cases  it  is  diminishing. 

(iv)     Resolution  of  r  and  n. 
It  seems  clear  that  none  of  the  poets  recognized  in  the  abstract  a 
word  indara.     It  follows  that  the  form  is  of  metrical  origin,  and  due 


106  History  of  syllabic  change 

to  the  constraining  of  a  common  type  of  decasyllabic  verse  to  fit  in 
recitation  the  standard  of  a  full  Tristubh  verse.  The  preceding  heavy 
syllable  must  have  contributed  to  justify  such  a  pronunciation,  since 
that  condition  is  fulfilled  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  in  which  the  r 
of  -ra  is  vocalised :  rudara  seems  therefore  to  be  due  to  the  fancy  of 
an  isolated  poet.  The  resolutions  of  ndsatyd  and  ddityd,  although  of  a 
different  type,  seem  to  be  of  the  same  artificial  character. 

(v)  Miscellaneous  restorations. 
The  occasions  for  these  rapidly  diminish  throughout  the  Rigveda 
proper :  this  may  be  explained  in  individual  cases  either  by  the  gradual 
disuse  of  archaic  forms  or  by  the  increasing  strictness  of  the  metre. 
In  the  popular  Rigveda  the  number  increases,  and  a  large  proportion 
may  be  cases  in  which  no  restoration  is  really  required,  the  metre 
being  in  fact  disordered.  The  doubtful  cases  included  in  this  section 
number  rather  more  than  one- tenth  of  the  whole. number  considered  in 
this  chapter. 

154.  The  text  of  the  Rigveda,  when  metrically  restored, 
shews  us  a  dialect  in  which  the  vowels  are  relatively  more 
frequent,  and  the  syllables  therefore  lighter  and  more  musical, 
than  is  the  case  in  classical  Sanskrit.  The  Homeric  dialect 
differs  just  in  the  same  way  from  classical  Greek. 

The  term  '  heroic'  has  already  been  used  (§  76)  to  describe  the 
vocabulary  of  the  Rigveda  proper,  in  accordance  with  the  martial 
dignity  and  vigour  which  distinguishes  it  (see  §  85).  This  term 
may  appropriately  be  used  to  describe  the  Vedic  dialect  as  a 
whole,  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  the  Homeric  dialect. 

In  view  of  the  antiquity  of  the  literary  records  in  the  two 
'  heroic '  dialects,  we  may  well  believe  that  the  '  resolved '  forms 
which  characterize  them  are  on  the  whole  earlier  than  the  corre- 
sponding '  contracted '  forms  of  the  same  languages  in  their 
classical  periods.  Our  investigations  however  shew  that  this 
general  principle  admits  of  many  exceptions. 

It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  book  to  trace  the  history  of 
resolved  forms  according  to  the  principles  of  comparative  grammar. 
That  forms  like  pdanti  and  ydam  are  not  necessarily  older  in  them- 
selves than  pdnti  and  gam  has  been  pointed  out  by  J.  Wackernagel 
(Altindische  Grammatik,  §  45)  and  others. 

That  the  accent  tends  to  preserve  the  individuality  of  a  syllable 
appears  from  §  135,  and  perhaps  also  from  §  142.  The  accent  may 
also  help  to  account  for  a  single  syllable  developing  into  two,  and  thus 
the  resolution  of  -dm  in  the  gen.  pi.  may  have  begun  with  words  like 
naram,  pura?n,  apami  in  which  that  syllable  bore  originally  the  cir- 
cumflex accent.  But  it  does  not  appear  that  the  Rigveda  makes  any 
distinction  in  this  respect  between  accented  and  unaccented  syllables. 


History  of  syllabic  change  107 

155.    Table  of  the  occasions  for  Syllabic  Restoration. 


Refer  to  § 

Periods 

Arch. 

Stroph. 

Normal 

Cretic 

Pop. 

Units  of  bulk 

1-9 

•9 

18 

11 

•9 

Long  vowels  and  diphthongs  : 

142 

Root-stems 

2341 

68  2 

45 

20 

13 

15 

143 

Gen.  pi.  -aam  (dimeter  cadence) 

332 

140 

140 

92 

69 

27 

&gt;  j 

,,         ,,       (dimeter  elsewhere) 
,,         „       (trimeter) 

72 

42 

18 

13 

12 

3 

11 

119 

88 

16 

5 

6 

4 

Y,    V    EXCEPTIONALLY    CONSONANTAL  : 

All  instances 

671 

103 

90 

82 

108 

141 

135 

y,  v  accented 

36 

2 

3 

3 

2 

23 

136 

Suffix  -ya  after  light  syllables3 

92 

12 

22 

16 

16 

15 

137 

„       ,,      heavy       „  4 

83 

17 

7 

8 

16 

14 

&gt;&gt; 

surya 

140 

15 

13 

19 

25 

40 

»&gt; 

,,     (ratio)5 

32 

23 

37 

29 

51 

138 

tvdm 

157 

34 

19 

15 

21 

26 

&gt;j 

„^     (ratio)5 

25 

23 

17 

27 

42 

&gt;&gt; 

tvdm,  tve,  tvd- 

100 

17 

17 

14 

15 

8 

139 

Endings  -yd,  -yoh 

Resolution  after  heavy  syllables: 

29 

3 

2 

3 

9 

5 

All  instances 

322 

50 

43 

48 

40 

52 

144 

Endings  -bhidm,  -bhiah 

137 

18 

13 

21 

24 

27 

145 

,,        -dhuam,  etc. 

32 

3 

8 

7 

4 

3 

&gt;  j 

Suffixes   -va,   -vl,  -vdnis 

63 

14 

11 

8 

10 

3 

j&gt; 

Gerunds 

13 

2 

0 

2 

4 

2 

15 

Enclitic  tvd 
Y  v  exceptionally  resolved  : 

54 

13 

10 

6 

3 

10 

146 

-iai,   -idh,  -idm 

44 

7 

7 

6 

5 

7 

147 

-nu  (verbal) 

22 

3 

2 

7 

3 

0 

&gt; » 

Optative  (with  nam) 

26 

8 

4 

4 

0 

0 

&gt;  &gt; 

,,         sidnia 

94 

9 

19 

16 

22 

6 

148 

tua 

7 

0 

1 

0 

0 

6 

5&gt; 

tudyd,  tudt 

29 

6 

1 

5 

4 

3 

&gt;J 

diauh,  didm 

37 

6 

6 

6 

4 

6 

&gt;&gt; 

syd 

31 

8 

6 

3 

4 

0 

}  &gt; 

svd 

45 

10 

5 

4 

6 

9 

&gt;&gt; 

Other  words 
Resolution  of  -ra,  -na  : 

11 

2 

1 

2 

2 

1 

149 

indra  (decasyllabic  hymns)6 

83 

[287] 

&gt;&gt; 

,,       (elsewhere  in  trimeter  verse) 

56 

27 

25 

10 

6 

3 

rudrd 

27 

1 

1 

10 

5 

2 

,, 

-ra,  -na  (decasyllabic  hymns)6 

17 

[60] 

» » 

. ,          (elsewhere  in  trim,  verse) 

14 

6 

5 

3 

3 

0 

150 

ndsatyd,  ddityd,  resolved 
Miscellaneous  and  doubtful  : 

73 

13 

17 

15 

5 

0 

151  i 

Long  vowels  and  diphthongs 

74 

23 

11 

5 

3 

10 

151  ii 

Resolution  of  y  v  r 

63 

13 

8 

9 

6 

11 

151  iii 

Various  textual  corrections 

80 

17 

23 

5 

7 

11 

152  i 

Glosses 

25 

6 

2 

2 

0 

7 

152  ii 

Dvandva  derivatives 

5 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

1  The  figures  in  this  column  shew  the  whole  actual  number  of  occun-ences. 

2  The  figures  in  the  remaining  columns  are  proportional,  as  explained  in  §  153. 

3  Including  divyd  and  sakhyd.  4  Except  sHrya. 

6  In  these  lines  are  given  the  percentages  of  consonantal  values  for  each  period, 
out  of  the  whole  number  of  resolved  and  consonantal  values  taken  together. 

6  The  whole  number  of  verses  in  decasyllabic  hymns  is  about  1500 ;  the 
proportional  figures  are  given,  as  elsewhere,  as  for  5000  verses. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

QUANTITATIVE   RESTORATION. 

156.  The  metrical  laws  of  the  Rigveda  recognize  only  the 
distinction  between  long  and  short  syllables,  a  long  syllable  being 
one  that  contains  a  long  vowel  or  a  short  vowel  followed  by  two 
consonants.  Since  the  text  distinguishes  throughout  the  long 
vowels  by  special  symbols,  and  also  denotes  each  consonant  by  a 
distinct  symbol  or  (in  consonant-groups)  by  a  distinct  element  in 
a  symbol,  it  contains  implicitly  a  complete  commentary  on  the 
quantitative  value  of  syllables:  and  any  question  that  may  be 
raised  implies  a  doubt  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  text,  and  can 
only  be  discussed  by  the  help  of  a  criterion  not  directly  dependent 
upon  the  text. 

All  the  rules  which  prescribe  the  quantities  of  syllables  in 
different  positions  in  the  verse,  such  as  those  given  in  §§  31 — 47, 
admit  of  exceptions :  and  therefore  no  safe  conclusion  can  be 
drawn  from  the  occasional  appearance  of  a  particular  syllable  in  a 
position  in  which  long  or  short  quantity  is  generally  required. 
But  the  general  use  of  a  syllable  which  recurs  with  any  frequency 
must  necessarily  reveal  its  quantity,  in  accordance  with  the 
principle  of  quantitative  evidence  explained  in  §  9.  Short  syllables 
must  on  the  whole  be  placed  in  positions  which  favour  short 
quantity  or  are  indifferent :  and  long  syllables  in  positions  which 
favour  long  quantity  or  are  indifferent.  If  any  syllable  is  used 
indifferently  in  all  positions  in  the  verse,  it  must  be  because  its 
quantity  was  regarded  as  indifferently  long  or  short. 

The  principal  questions  that  arise  concern  (i)  the  quantity  of 
variant  final  vowels,  that  is,  final  vowels  not  uniformly  written  in 
the  Samhita  text,  and  (ii)  the  quantity  of  final  long  vowels  before 
hiatus.  Incidentally  we  are  also  concerned  (iii)  with  the  value  of 
final  -o  (Pp.  -o  iti). 


Position  the  evidence  of  quantity  loo 

The  principle  of  evidence  here  asserted  is  precisely  the  same  which 
has  been  followed  in  the  discussions  on  Sandhi  and  on  Syllabic 
Restoration.  It  reduces  to  secondary  importance  all  questions  as  to 
the  readings  of  the  Samhita  or  Padapatha  texts  :  and  accordingly, 
whilst  the  readings  of  the  former  are  noted  throughout,  and  those  of 
the  latter  when  they  are  of  interest,  the  general  discussion  of  them 
will  be  reserved  till  the  end  of  the  chapter  :  for  only  in  cases  in  which 
the  metrical  evidence  leaves  reasonable  doubt  will  it  be  justifiable  to 
pay  regard  even  to  so  ancient  a  tradition  as  that  of  the  Samhita  text. 

Although  the  principle  adopted  leads  to  changes  in  the  text  which 
are  in  many  cases  considerable,  it  is  seldom  that  any  real  difficulty 
arises  in  words  and  forms  which  are  of  frequent  occurrence.  For  if  the 
text  does  not  correspond  to  the  usage,  the  question  is  whether  the  poets 
have  regularly  used  words  in  positions  for  which  they  are  not  well 
suited  metrically,  or  the  editors  of  the  text  have  introduced  unsound 
alterations.  As  to  the  first  alternative  it  is  impossible  to  pronounce 
until  a  broad  view  has  been  reached  as  to  the  metrical  standards  of  the 
poets  in  the  Rigveda  as  a  whole.  But  as  to  the  second  possibility  there 
is  no  real  room  for  doubt,  in  view  of  the  results  recorded  in  the  last 
two  chapters,  and  generally  accepted  by  critics  of  the  Veda.  Still  it 
should  be  of  value  to  indicate  the  probable  causes  of  the  most  common 
errors  of  the  Samhita  text,  as  is  attempted  in  §§  175,  176. 

But,  exactly  as  in  the  preceding  chapters,  there  are  fairly  numerous 
cases  of  forms  and  words  which  are  somewhat  rare  in  the  Rigveda,  and 
in  which  therefore  the  bulk  of  evidence  is  insufficient  to  establish  a 
rule  as  to  general  use.  Tn  such  cases  the  decision  between  alternative 
probabilities  will  be  a  matter  for  individual  judgment. 

157.  The  chief  positions  which  favour  short  quantity  are  (i)  the 
fifth  and  seventh  places  in  dimeter  verse,  and  the  ninth  (and 
eleventh)  places  in  trimeter  verse ;  (ii)  the  second  place  after  the 
caesura,  whether  early  or  late ;  and  (less  regularly)  the  first  place 
after  the  caesura  also. 

The  chief  positions  which  favour  long  quantity  are  (i)  the  sixth 
place  in  dimeter  verse,  and  the  eighth  and  tenth  places  in 
trimeter  verse ;  (ii)  the  second  place  in  either  kind  of  verse,  if 
the  third  syllable  is  short,  and  the  third  place,  if  the  second 
syllable  is  short;  and  to  an  extent  much  less  marked  (iii)  the 
second  and  fourth  places  in  either  kind  of  verse  except  as  just 
described,  and  the  seventh  place  in  trimeter  verse  after  an  early 
caesura. 

The  quantity  is  indifferent  in  initial  and  final  syllables,  in  the 
third  place  except  as  described  above,  and  in  the  fifth  place  of 
trimeter  verse  before  late  caesura,  unless  the  fourth  syllable  is 
short. 

Syllables  containing  short  final  vowels  are,  however,  admitted 


110  Symbols  denoting  position 

more  freely  than  other  short  syllables  to  the  second  place  in  either 
kind  of  verse  when  the  third  syllable  is  short,  and  to  the  eighth 
place  in  trimeter  verse. 

These  general  rules,  with  the  exception  of  the  last,  which  will  be 
the  subject  of  discussion  later,  follow  directly  from  the  description  of 
the  Vedic  rhythms  in  §§  31  to  47.  It  will  however  be  of  advantage 
to  base  them  upon  direct  experiment  applied  to  undisputed  long  and 
short  final  vowels,  since  the  most  important  questions  have  to  do  with 
final  vowels  :  and  also  to  express  the  results  by  symbols  which  will 
readily  lend  themselves  to  the  numerical  calculations  upon  which  we 
have  to  rely. 

The  various  positions  in  the  verse  may  be  shortly  denoted  as  follows  : 
initial  and  final  syllables  by  the  letters  In,  Fin  :  the  fourth  to  the 
seventh  place  in  dimeter  verse  by  the  numerals  4,  5,  6,  7,  and  the  same 
positions  in  trimeter  verse  by  these  numbers  followed  by  A  or  B 
according  as  the  caesura  is  early  or  late  :  the  eighth  to  the  tenth  (or 
eleventh)  place  in  trimeter  verse  by  the  respective  numerals. 

The  second  and  third  places  in  dimeter  verse  may  be  denoted  by 
2D  3D,  and  in  trimeter  verse  by  2T  3T  :  but  in  either  case  if  the  other 
syllable  of  the  two  is  short  a  special  position  results  favouring  long 
quantity.  These  positions  may  be  denoted  2d  3d  2t  3t  respectively. 
Similarly  before  a  late  caesura  the  fourth  and  fifth  syllables  may  be 
denoted  by  4b  and  5b  respectively,  if  the  other  syllable  of  the  two  is 
short,  these  positions  again  favouring  long  quantity  in  a  very  marked 
way. 

There  are  some  other  positions  which  are  comparatively  rare,  and 
yet  require  to  be  discriminated.  Thus  if  after  an  early  caesura  the 
sixth  syllable  is  long,  the  seventh  will  usually  be  short  (§  46)  ;  this 
position  may  be  denoted  by  7a.  The  third  place  in  the  reopening  of 
epic  Anustubh  is  usually  long  (§  41) :  this  position  may  be  denoted  by 
3e.  The  seventh  place  in  Trochaic  Gayatrl  or  the  semicadence  of  epic 
Anustubh  is  very  often  long,  and  may  be  denoted  by  7g.  Occurrences 
before  consonant-groups  are  denoted  by  Gr. 

In  decasyllabic  verses  the  syllables  will  be  numbered  to  correspond 
with  the  Tristubh  rhythm,  one  position  before  or  after  the  caesura 
being  unoccupied. 

Occurrences  in  positions  in  which  the  metre  is  difficult  to  determine, 
as  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  places  in  Trochaic  Gayatrl,  and  occurrences 
in  Sandhi  combination,  are  altogether  omitted  from  consideration : 
occurrences  of  long  final  vowels  before  hiatus  are  considered  separately 
(§§  172-174). 

This  system  of  symbols,  of  which  use  will  be  made  throughout  the 
chapter,  may  be  illustrated  as  follows  : 

In  2T      3T  4A    5A  6A  7A     8  9    10    Fin 

pari  dydvd-prthivi  jabhra  urvi  i  61  8c 

In  2T    U     4B    5B     6B  7B  8        9  10  Fin 

dvitd  w  vavre   sandjd  sdriih  i  62  7a 

In    2t    3T    4A     5A  6A  7a    ^  8        9  10     11  Fin 

asydma  tad  ddityd  juhvato  havih  viii  27  22c 


Normal  distribution  of  final  vowels 


I  1  1 


In  2t  3t  4b    5B 

svdsiti    apsu  \\ 

In   2i&gt;      3D     4     5      6,    7  Fin 

putro  nd  bahup&amp;yiam 


IB       8        9      10  Fin 

hafiiso  nd  titdcm 


i  65  9a 
viii  27  22b 


The  interpretation  of  the  symbols  is  shewn  in  a  tabular  form  on 
p.  148. 

If  now  we  take  1000  occurrences  of  undoubted  long  vowels,  taken 
at  random  from  hymns  which  contain  the  same  proportion  of  trimeter 
and  dimeter  verse  as  the  whole  Rigveda,  and  then  1000  occurrences  of 
undoubted  short  vowels  taken  in  the  same  way,  we  find  them  distributed 
amongst  the  various  possible  positions  as  follows : 

Table  shewing  the  distribution  of  long  and  short 
final  vowels. 


A 

~ 

B 

- 

C 

- 

~ 

D 

- 

- 

E 

-   - 

3t,  5b   5 

0 

2T       02 

15 

In 

48 

54 

Gr 

15 

170 

5 

0  130 

3d    10 

0 

2t       62 

12 

Fi 

226 

145 

5A 

2 

22 

7 

0    2 

10    37 

1 

2d       22 

5 

2D 

15 

15 

7a 

0    1 

4A      121 

24 

4D 

21 

18 

6A 

1 

10 

7B 

0   10 

6    28 

1 

4B,  4b     5 

0 

5B 

70 

64 

6B 

4 

34 

9 

1  145 

8    121 

5 

7A      82 
3e,  7g,  7e   1 

21 
0 

3D 
3T 

26 
15 

48 
45 

11 

0    3 

201 

7 

355 

77 

421 

389 

22 

236 

1  291 

This  table  may  be  interpreted  as  follows  for  the  present  purpose : 
If  there  is  no  grammatical  motive  drawing  a  form  or  word  towards 
particular  positions  in  the  verse,  its  place  will  be  determined  by  the 
quantity  of  the  syllables,  and  in  the  case  of  forms  which  have  only  the 
final  syllable  in  common,  by  the  quantity  of  the  final  syllable.  Thus  a 
long  final  syllable  will  be  distributed  fairly  evenly  between  the  positions 
of  groups  A,  B,  and  C  above :  and  a  short  final  syllable  between  the 
positions  of  groups  C,  D,  and  E.  Still  short  final  vowels  are  not  rare 
in  the  positions  of  group  B,  and  are  occasionally  found  even  in  group  A. 
But  if  the  grammatical  function  of  a  word  draws  it  to  the  beginning 
or  end  of  a  clause,  the  results  will  be  different.  Many  relatives  and 
conjunctions  are  disyllables  which  regularly  stand  at  the  beginning 
of  the  verse,  since  in  the  Rigveda  each  verse  is  a  fairly  complete 
grammatical  whole.  Since  then  the  final  vowel  necessarily  stands  in 
the  second  place,  it  is  so  far  restricted  to  the  positions  2t  2d  2T  2D 
and  Gr,  none  of  which  is  in  itself  decisive.  But  we  may  infer 
from  the  table  that  if  the  vowel  is  short  the  positions  2T,  2D  will  be 
commoner  than  2t  2d,  and  also  that  consonant  groups  will  very 
frequently  follow  :  whereas  if  the  vowel  is  long  the  quantity  of  the 
third  syllable  will  be  just  as  often  short  as  long,  and  consonant-groups 
will  follow  comparatively  seldom. 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


112  Variant  final  rowels  proved  long 

If  on  the  other  hand  a  word  is  drawn  by  its  grammatical  function 
to  the  end  of  the  verse,  the  occurrences  so  far  elude  the  test,  as  the 
value  of  the  final  syllable  is  optional.  In  most  cases  however  the  same 
words  occur  very  commonly  before  the  caesura  also.  We  may  then 
infer  from  the  table  that  if  the  final  syllable  is  long,  the  occurrences 
will  be  most  common  before  an  early  caesura  :  if  it  is  short,  before 
a  late  caesura. 

These  various  classes  of  words  are  illustrated  in  the  Table  in  §  164, 
in  which  only  those  particulars  are  given  which  are  practically  required. 
Where  the  results  are  intermediate  between  those  which  are  to  be 
expected  for  a  long  and  a  short  vowel  respectively,  the  inference  to  be 
drawn  is  that  the  quantity  was  regarded  as,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent, 
optional. 

No  precise  inference  is  to  be  drawn  from  the  distribution  of  final 
vowels  as  to  the  rhythm  of  the  verse.  In  the  first  place,  long  final 
vowels  are  more  common  than  short,  and  therefore  in  a  given  quantity 
of  verse,  appear  in  every  position  with  relatively  greater  frequency 
than  the  table  suggests.  Further  the  final  syllables  which  end  with 
consonants  are  in  a  majority  of  instances  made  long  by  position,  except 
when  they  occur  at  the  end  of  the  verse.  Thus  the  long  syllables  in  the 
positions  2t  2d,  2D,  4,  exceed  the  short  syllables  in  a  much  larger 
proportion  than  this  table  indicates,  and  those  in  the  positions  3T,  3D 
are  much  more  nearly  equal  in  number  to  the  short  syllables  which 
occur  there. 

158.  Long  final  vowels  are  regularly  found  in  the  following 
forms :  (i)  in  the  perfect- endings  of  the  1  pers.  sing.,  1  pers.  pi., 
and  2  pers.  pi.  (-d,  -md,  -a) :  (ii)  in  the  2  sing,  imperative  of  the 
root-aorist  middle  (svd)  :  (iii)  in  the  gerunds  in  -tyd,  -yd  (includ- 
ing -dyd)  :  (iv)  in  the  case-endings  -tari,  -I  (instr.),  -t%  -ui  and  in 
end  (pronoun) :  and  (v)  in  the  following  adverbs  ;  dccha,  dthd, 
end,  evd,  Mid,  ghd,  nil  in  the  combination  nil  cit,  purudhd,  visvddhd, 
visvdhd  (including  visvdhd),  and  smd,  although  the  text  now  and 
then  gives  short  quantity. 

For  the  forms  used  in  the  text,  see  §  177  i.  From  the  table  in 
§164  it  will  be  seen  at  once  that  the  general  distribution  of  the 
syllables  concerned  closely  corresponds  to  the  average  for  long 
syllables  as  shewn  in  §  157  :  and  the  only  doubt  that  arises  is  whether 
the  few  occurrences  in  group  E  are  due  to  metrical  or  quantitative 
irregularity. 

(i)     The  following  are  examples  of  the  regular  quantities  : 
bibhdyd  hi  tudvatah  viii  45  35a 

a  yahi  susumd  hi  te  viii  17  1a 

tdm  vdjam  citrdm  rbhavo  dada  nah  iv  36  9d. 

There  is  one  exception,  anaha  *viii  48  5b  (9). 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Variant  final  vowels  usually  long  113 

(ii)  In  the  disyllabic  imperatives  of  the  root  aorist  the  final  vowel 
is  always  long,  as  in  krsvd,  trdsvd,  nidtsvd  (mdtsud),  vdmsvd  :  as  for 
instance  : 

nU  no  rayim  tipa  mdsvd  nrvdntam  ix  93  5a. 

(iii)     The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the  gerunds  : 
sd  pravolhfn  parigdtyd  dabhiteh  ii  15  4a 

td  utsndyd  rayim  abhi  prd  tasthuh  ib.  5c. 

There  are  a  few  exceptions,  almost  all  of  which  are  in  the  popular 
Rigveda:  -tya  *x  97  21c  (5);  -ya  i  67  10b  (9),  *x  71  9c  (9),  *130 
7c  (9). 

(iv)  Except  the  instrumental  forms  in  41  and  -I,  these  case-endings 
are  rare  in  the  Rigveda :  for  instance  -ul  (locative)  is  only  found  in 
camici  and  tanul,  of  which  the  first  only  occurs  in  combination,  and 
the  second  rarely  except  before  consonant  groups.  But  at  any  rate 
the  hypothesis  of  long  final  vowels  meets  every  metrical  necessity, 
Examples  are  : 

vi  tdm  duhre  aryamd  kartdrl  sdcd  i  139  7f 

jathdre  somam  tanul  sdho  mdhah  ii  16  2c 

suarvatlr  apd  end  jayema  v  2  lid. 

(v)     Examples  of  the  use  of  the  adverbs  named  are  : 
sd  yajndndm  dtha  hi  sd  iii  13  3b 

tdsmai  visah  svaydm  evd  namante  iv  50  8c 

indra  surin  krnuhl  sma  no  ardhdm  vi  44  18d 

yahi  suno  sahaso  ydsya  nu  cit  vi  18  lie. 

Exceptions  are  few  and  very  doubtful  :  but  we  find  perhaps  dtha  in 
viii  10  5d  (5),  end  (text  end)  in  vi  20  10b  (9),  gha  (text  gha)  in  viii 
1  30a  (7  in  irregular  dimeter  verse),  and  visvdha  (text  -ha)  i  25  12a. 

159.  In  the  following  forms  long  quantity  is  regular  in  the 
Rigveda,  but  short  quantity  is  a  fairly  frequent  variation  :  (i)  the 
imperative  in  -a,  -a ;  (ii)  the  second  person  plural  in  -thd,  -thand, 
-td,  -tand ;  (iii)  the  neuter  pi.  in  -a  (from  stems  in  -cm,  -van,  and 
-man),  in  -%,  and  in  -u. 

(i)  The  imperative  in  -d,  -a  occurs  in  over  1 300  passages :  in  40 
the  vowel  is  certainly  short,  in  the  following  positions :  5.  *i  23  23d, 
42  4c,  iii  51  lib,  vi  51  13c,  viii  32  7c,  ix  49  4b,  61  23c,  63  22c, 
66  30c,     *x  9  9d,  *85  35c,  *87  25d.  7.    viii  44  2c,     ix  107  6c,  114 

*3d*4b.  7B.    iii  32  12c,    viii  51  3c,    *x  18  lib.  9.    i  56  2d, 

57  4d,  102  3a  5c,  144  7a,  ii  23  Id,  iii  15  6a,  vi  15  16b,  *47  29d, 
vii  13  3c,  18  18b,  *viii  100  4a,  x  38  lb,  *87  9a*10a*17d,  *95  la, 
*103  5d,  122  2a,  148  3a.  11.    i  102  3d.     Also  probably  in  x  116 

7d  (6A). 

(ii)  The  second  person  plural  in  -thd,  -td  (-tha,  -ta)  occurs  over 
800  times,  and  is  certainly  short  in  the  following  43  passages : 

-tha :     5.    viii  18  15b,  19  34b,  67  17c,     *x  97  5d  *9b. 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 

8 


114  Adverbs  in  -u,  -u 

-ta:  5.  i  3  8b,  *23  19c*21a,  80  9b,  172  3c,  ii  41  14c,  v  51  2c, 
vii  59  3d,  viii  3  13b,  18  10b,  32  17c,  72  13c,  ix  46  4b  4c,  62  18c, 
106  3b,  x  *19  lb,  *85  33b,  93  15c  15d  15e,  *97  19d,  132  6d,  *175 
2b,  188  lb.  7.    ix  67  27c.  9.    i  85  6b,  *161  7a,     iii  33  12d, 

60  2b,     iv  36  4b,     vii  34  6a,  56  9a,     viii  18  21c,     *x  13  4a,  *15  6b, 
•51  8b,  66  12b. 

(iii)  The  endings  -thana,  -tana  occur  151  times,  but  of  these  100 
are  at  the  end  of  the  verse  and  22  in  combination.  The  remaining 
passages,  with  three  exceptions,  favour  the  long  vowel. 

The  exceptions  are  all  in  the  5th  place  dimeter,  namely  iv  37  7b, 
viii  18  15a,  *x  175  2c. 

(iv)  The  neuter  plural  forms  in  -a  (from  stems  in  -an,  -man,  -van), 
-t  and  -ii  occur  about  225  times  ;  in  many  instances  the  interpretation 
is  uncertain,  and  the  forms  may  be  singular.  Only  in  six  passages 
are  plural  forms  with  short  final  vowel  fairly  certain,  namely  malid 
ix  88  4a  (6A),  sdrma  i  58  8b  (9),  174  2b  (7B),  vi  20  10c  (7B),  purd 
vi  44  14a  (7B),  balm  *x  52  4b  (6A). 

In  all  these  endings  the  occurrences  in  groups  A  and  B  so  greatly 
outnumber  those  in  D  and  E  (see  Table,  §  164)  that  we  are  likely 
generally  to  be  in  the  right  in  assuming  long  quantity  not  only  in 
occurrences  in  A  and  B,  but  also  in  those  in  C.  This  implies  a  very 
considerable  departure  from  the  practice  of  the  text,  for  which  see 
§  176  ii.  The  occurrences  in  D  may  be  taken  to  be  those  of  the  short 
vowels :  but  as  in  all  cases  but  one  a  consonant-group  follows,  this  is 
not  certain,  and  the  metre  is  not  affected. 

Of  the  occurrences  of  the  short  vowels  one  third  are  in  the  popular 
Rigveda. 

The  Pada-patha  has  correctly  kept  the  old  value  of  the  vowels  in 
tri,  aha,  slrsti. 

160.  Disyllabic  adverbs  have  regularly  final  -u  in  the  Rigveda : 
the  particles  u  tii  nd  sd  are  used  side  by  side  with  u  tu  nti  tedt,t 
although  the  forms  with  long  vowels  do  not  often  appear  in  the  text. 

(i)  maksii  and  mithih  have  always  long  quantity,  which  is  also 
given  in  the  text.  In  trsu  the  long  vowel  must  be  restored  throughout, 
the  occurrences  that  have  weight  being  i  58  4c,  iv  7  11a,  vii  3  4b, 
and  x  91  7b  (all  2t).  Further  purtt  is  found  regularly  in  puru  cit, 
and  as  an  adverb  *i  191  9b  (2D),  vii  62  lb  (2T),  97  7d  (2t),  viii  4 
lc  (4 A),  ix  15  2a  (4),  x  61  13b  (2t)  ;  and  also  as  the  first  element 
in  a  dvandva  derivative,  as  in  puru-  purubhujd  v  73  lc  (4,  6)  and 
vi  63  8a  (2T,  6B),  purii-  puruhutdh  viii  2  32b  (4),  16  7b  (4)  and  in  a 
separated  compound,  as  puru-  ydc  chdmsam  i  166  13b  (2T).  For 
puru-,  puru-  in  ordinary  compounds  see  §  166  iv.  stidhih  should 
probably  be  restored  in  viii  32  10c  (2D),  in  ii  3  6a  (2t)  before  hiatus, 
and  elsewhere  at  the  end  of  the  verse. 

The  adverbs  may  represent  an  instrumental  singular  or  neut.  plural 
form  :  the  evidence  is  insufficient  to  establish  a  neuter  singular  in  -u, 
though  it  is  favoured  in  one  or  two  passages,  as  uric  vi  20  5c  (2t),  47 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Adverbs  in  -ii,  -u  1 1  r&gt; 

He  (2t),  61  lib  (2t),  x  147  5b  (2t),  puni  iv  31  8c  (2D),  *x  94  5d 
(2T).     In  i  6  5a  (2d)  vl[it  rid  should  probably  be  read  as  neut.  plural. 

•  (ii)  The  occurrences  of  the  particle  tfi,  tu  are  :  A1.  8,  v  2  7d. 
B.  2T1,  iii  36  9a,  iv  1  10a,  22  5a,  ix  72  8a  9a,  97  38d,  107  24a: 
2d1,  i  10  11a,  29  lc  2c  3c,  iii  41  la,  iv  32  la,  viii  7  lie,  13  14a,  69 
16a:  2T2,  i  69  8c,  iv  22  6a1,  vi  29  5b,  viii  21  10c,  x  1  6a, 
♦101  10a1:         4A,  *x  88  6c.  C1.     2D,  viii  2  22a:         3T,  i  169 

4a,  vi  23  7b2.  D2.    Gr.,  7  times  :        6 A,  i  177  4c.  E2.    5,  *x 

85  35d  :        7,  vi  48  9d  :        11,  viii  27  14c. 

1  Text  tu.  2  Text  tit. 

(iii)  The  occurrences  of  the  particle  nd,  nil  are :  A.  3t2,  i  72 
8d3,  167  9a4,  ii  33  7d5,  vi  27  3a4,  viii  25  23c4,  66  9c4 :  3d2,  i  80 
15a4,  viii  12  4c3:  6\  i  17  8a,  172  3a2,  ii  8  la  :  81,  iii  58  6d, 
iv  16  21a,  *18  3b,  vi  9  6d,  63  10c,  viii  21  7b  :  10\  i  56  2c,  v  31 
13a,     vi  8  la,  15  5c,  22  5b.  B.     2t,  i  59  6a1,  64  13a1,  165  10b2, 

186  9a2,  iii  49  2a2,  v  30  3a2:  2T2,  i  139  lb,  166  la,  iii  55  18b, 
v  41  la,  vi  8  lb,  viii  101  15c,  ix  92  5a,  x  69  5d:  4A2,  i  32  la, 
89  9a,  iii  31  9c,  55  18a,  iv  20  4b,  v  41  13a,  85  6a,  vi  18  3c,  52  5b, 
66  3b,  viii  51  7c,  *x  59  4b,  62  6c,  100  6a,  *168  la:  4B2,  i  148 
3a,  vi  24  3c,  vii  19  9a,  37  5c,  x  132  3a:  4b,  vi  48  16b2:  7A2, 
iii  38  2d,  iv40  1a.  C.  Initial,  25  times1.  2D2,  i  25  17a,  v  67 
5a,  vi  59  la,  vii  66  5b,  viii  40  9e,  45  37a  :  42,  viii  77  la,  x  72 
la  :  5B2,  ii  11  3a  15a  16a  17a,  28  9c,  vi  47  22a,  x  61  5b  :  3T7, 
51  times :         3D7,   22  times.  D2.     Before  consonant-groups   29 

times  :      6B,  x  79  6b.  E2.    5,  i  132  le  :  •  7,  i  17  8a,  22  8b,    viii 

46  28d,  *x  175  4a :  9,  *i  164  32b,  v  32  9c,  33  8d,  vi  17  9a,  50  5a, 
vii  39  6d,^  *x  27  7b,  111  7d. 

For  nu  cit  see  §  158.  The  occurrences  in  decisive  positions  are: 
A.    8,  iv  6  7b,    vi  39  3c,    viii  27  9c,  46  lie  :         10,  vi  18  8d  lie. 

1  Text  nil.  2  Text  nu.  3  §  163  vi.  4  §  171  iv.  5  §  167  iii. 

6  §  175  ii.  7  Occurrences  of  u  ml  in  the  second  and  third  places  are  included 

here. 

(iv)  In  the  case  of  the  particle  u  u  many  actual  and  possible 
occurrences  must  be  left  out  of  account  here,  as  well  as  the  occurrences 
of  an  element  u  which  is  of  phonetic  character,  and  distinct  from  the 
particle.  In  the  last  class  are  included  not  only  the  well-known  u  of 
u  lokd  and  that  in  the  suffix  -tava  u  for  -tavai,  but  also  other  cases  in 
which  -a  u  stands  for  final  -ai,  -au,  or  -ah  (§171  v).  As  doubtful  all 
occurrences  of  u  in  such  forms  as  dtho,  ilpo  are  omitted,  except  when 
hiatus  has  to  be  postulated  before  u  (§171  ii-iv).  Occurrences  before 
hiatus  are  considered  separately  (§  173  iv) :  but  the  somewhat  frequent 
occurrences  of  u  in  the  second  place  in  the  combinations  u  nil,  Ft  su 
must  be  left  out  of  account,  as  it  is  not  possible  to  'determine  with 
certainty  the  quantity  of  the  third  syllable. 

The  remaining  occurrences  are  as  follows,  the  text  giving  u  unless 
otherwise  stated : 

A.  3t,  i  112  Id  =  2d  =  3d3,  184  2a3,  iii  20  2c,  62  2a,  iv  6  la3, 
51  2a,     v  73  8a3,     vi  15  la3  12b,  25  lc3,  27  7b3,  51  3a,  66  3b4,     vii  29 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 

8—2 


116  Adverbs  in  -u,  -u 

2c3,  95  6a,  viii  24  lc3,  ix  110  la3,  x  *10  14a3,  178  la3:  3d,  i  27 
4a3,  30  4a,  36  13a3,  ii  41  7a3,  vi  16  16a3,  44  4a,  vii  96  la,  viii  20 
19a3,  61  5a3,  63  8a,  92  7a:  6,  viii  61  12c!1:  8,  ii  18  2c1,  x  56  la1, 
*1614b:        10,  vi  51  10a,    x  61  24b4.  B.     2t,  ii  35  3cl,    iv  2  4d, 

vi  68  8a2,  viii  66  10a1,  *x  94  8c1:  2d,  v  10  6a2,  16  5a2,  17  5a2, 
viii  2  13c,  22  13c1,  30  3b,  40  3c,  ix  45  4a1:  2T,  i  32  15c,  ii  2  5b, 
37  2a  2b,  iii  4  10c,  v  29  13d,  58  la,  vi  22  2a,  37  2a,  40  2c,  vii  20 
5b,  38  2a,  42  3a,  61  6a,  62  6a2,  93  6c2,  100  la2,  *viii  48  3d:  4A, 
i  52  8a,  77  2b1,  ii  35  15b,  iii  1  3c,  31  7a,  iv  21  9d,  38  2b,  39  5c,  43 
2b,  vii  44  2a:  4B,  i  113  lie4:  7A,  i  108  4b,  178  5c,  ii  9  2a, 
iv  55  4c,    x  160  2a. 

C.  2D,  i  30  2c,  120  2c2,  v  52  15a2,  vi  54  2a,  viii  23  5a,  24  16a, 
66  10b,  84  5c,  93  15a,  x  *16  llc*13b,  *85  47d:  4,  viii  81  8a, 
x  126  3c  3d  6a:  Final,  viii  66  13a:  3T,  34  times:  3D,  36  times. 
D.  Gr,  154  times:  6A,  i  113  4c,  143  7d,  *164  16a  *19a  *19b,  ii  35 
10b,  iv  5  3d,  40  la,  *v  44  14b,  vi  38  la,  *vii  35  2a  *3a  *9c,  86  8c, 
x  *15  13b,  31  7a,  *81  4a.  E.    7B,  i  34  6b,  35  6d,  82  6d,  91  18a, 

110  la  Id,  139  4a,  *164  26d*48b,  iii  46  5c,  iv  21  9c,  39  la,  *v  83 
10a,  vi  9  6d,  27  Id,  vii  *35  2b  *7b  *llc  *12b,  x  39  lc,  40  11a, 
*52  3a,  *114  4d:  9,  iii  31  11a,  53  4a,  iv  7  9d,  22  7a,  viii  3  20a, 
21    9b,  23   7c,     x  2  3c,  *167  lc:  11,  v  55  7b:         5,  iii  24  4c, 

iv  8  4a,  viii  7  17b  22b,  44  9a,  52  10b,  *x  86  13b,  *173  2d: 
7,  ii  5  3b,     viii  82  3a,     *x  86  3c. 

1  Text  u.         2  Text  mi  for  ni  u,  §  124.         3  Text  ii  sil.  4  Text  u  nu. 

(v)     The  following  are  the  occurrences  of  the  particle  s%  su : 

A.  3t2,  viii  103  lc3:  3d,  i  37  14c3,  82  la3,  iv  31  3a4,  viii  7 
32a3,  67  15a3,  93  21a4,  ix  61  13a3:  61,  i  10  lie:  81,  iii  36  2c, 
*v83  10a,    viii  24  7c,    *x  59  4c:        10,  ii  20  la2.  B.    2t',  i  129 

5a,  139  7a  8a2,  148  3c,  173  12a,  ii  28  7d,  iii  30  6a,  33  9c,  55  2a,  iv 
26  4a2,  v  30  7a,. 42  13a,  viii  18  22c,  53  6c,  x  75  la2,  *101  lid: 
2d1,  vii  89  la2,  viii  27  3a,  32  19a:  2T2,  i  76  3a,  165  14c,  169  5c, 
ii  34  15d,  v  62  2a,  x  32  2d,  54  la,  *59  4a,  *94  14c1,  1 12  9a :  4A2, 
i  76  2b,  184  2a,  iii  30  21d,  31  14d,  iv  22  lOd,  vi  25  lc,  27  7b, 
vii  29  2c,  42  3c,  93  6a,  x  100  2a,  133  7a,  178  la:  4B2,  viii  24  lc: 
4b2,  i  138  4a,  139  If1,  iv  6  la,  20  4a,  vi  15  la:  7A,  *vi  74 
4b2.  C2.     2D,  105  3a,     iv  55  10a,     v  67  5c,     vi  45  33a,  56  4c, 

viii  18  3a  12a,  45  8a,  94  3a,  *x  59  8f,  133  3a:  4,  i  36  13a,  ii  41 
7a,     iii  24  2c1,     iv  32  6a3,     v  35  2d,  73  8a,  74  10c  lOd,     viii  1   19a, 

4  3d,  6  39a,  13  25a,  20  19a,  26  la1  15a  23b,  45  9a,  61  5a,  73  17a,  81 
8c:  5B,  6  times:  3T5,  29  times:  3D5,  22  times.  D2.  Gr., 
35  times:  6A,  *x  179  2a.  E2.  5,  i  84  3c,  iii  37  2a,  vi  48 
3d,  viii  6  32b,  34  12a,  82  6a,  *x  16  14c,  126  6a:  7,  *i  93  la6, 
*191  6d,  viii  18  18a,  40  la,  ix  49  la:  9,  i  *179  5c,  182  la,  v  63 
6c,    vi  21  7b,  33  la,    vii  26  3d,     ix  81  3c,  *x  18  12a:         11,  x  77  4c. 

1  Text  sit  2  Text  su.  3  §  171  iv.  4  §  167  iii. 

5  Occurrences    of   u  sil   in    the    second    and    third    places    are    included    here. 

6  Perhaps  7e,  but  see  §  198  ii. 

Many  of  the  appearances  of  nu  su  in  the  positions  3t,  3d  above  are 
due  to  restorations  which  will  be  explained  later  in  this  chapter :  but 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


adya,  adha,  and  yadi  117 

even  apart  from  these  the  long  vowels  are  amply  justified  for  all  four 
particles,  and  it  appears  reasonable  to  restore  the  forms  with  long 
vowels  in  all  occurrences  in  groups  A  and  B,  as  well  as  in  the  positions 
21)  and  4D. 

161.  In  the  adverbs  adya  {adyd),  ddha  (ddhd),  and  yddl 
(yddi)  the  short  and  long  vowels  appear  side  by  side  in  the  text, 
which  closely  follows  the  guidance  of  the  metre. 

The  occurrences  are  as  follows : 

(i)  adyd,  adyd:  A1.  8,  *i  161  13d,  180  10a,  iii  36  3d,  iv  25 
3a,  44  la,     v  51  13a,    x  30  2d  3c,  35  2d,  36  2d,  *81  7b.  B1.    2t, 

i  113  17c,  ii  29  2d,  v  1  11a2,  *vii  104  15a,  viii  3  8c,  x  55  5d: 
2d,  i  13  2c,  iv  30  23c,  v  74  lb,  vi  56  6c:  2T,  i  115  6a.  *163 
13c,  vi  30  3a,  50  4b,  x  35  Id,  54  2d2,  63  8d:  4A2,  i  125  3a,  182 
8c,  184  la,  ii  13  8d,  iv  44  3a1,  v  56  lc,  vi  24  5a,  71  6a,  vii  78  5a, 
viii  22  6c,  27  14c,     x  35  13a,  36  11a,  45  9a.  C.    2D1,  i  13  6c, 

44  Id  3a,  v  22  2d,  26  8b,  82  4a,  viii  22  lb:*  42,  i  25  19bl,  28  8a, 
44  9d,  *50  11a,  136  4e,  142  lb  8d,  ii  41  3a  20b,  v  13  2b,  53  12a, 
74  7a,  82  7b1,  vii  66  12a,  viii  1  10a  16a,  2  20a,  26  3a,  27  5a,  61 
17a1,  94  8a,  ix  44  6a,  65  28b1,  *x  127  4a:  5B2,  39  times:  Final2, 
33  times:        3T2,  14  times:        3D2,  11  times.  D2.    Before  groups, 

8  times.  E2.    7B,  viii  26  8c:        5,  i  188  la,    v  79  la,    viii  5  18a, 

*xl35  5c:         7,  *i  93  2a3,     ix  67  22a. 
1  The  text  has  adyd.        2  The  text  has  adyd.        3  Perhaps  7e,  but  see  §  198  ii. 

(ii)  ddha,  ddha:  A1.  6,  v  52  3c:  8,  vii  56  lb:  10,  ii  31  4d, 
x  92  14d,  115  lc.  B1.     2t,  i  55  5c,  101  9c,  114  lOd,  167  2c3, 

169  6c3,  186  9c3,  iv  2  14a  16a,  5  14c,  10  2a,  *18  9c,  vi  10  4c2,  vii  4 
8c,  29  3d,  56  7b,  88  2a,  *104  15c,  viii  101  10c,  ix  110  9a3,  x  6  7a, 
*10  14d,  61  22a2  24a,  *95  12d3*14c:  2d,  v  16  4a,  52  11a  lib  16c,  66 
4a,  vi  2  7a,  vii  15  14a,  74  5a,  viii  84  6a,  92  29c,  93  12a,  98  7a, 
x  25  3c,  33  3d,  *97  2c:  2T,  i  57  2a2,  102  7d,  104  7a,  129  llf,  156 
lc,  180  7c,  ii  17  4a,  30  3b,  iv  2  15a,  6  7c,  *18  13d,  22  6c,  27  4d* 
v  85  8d,  vi  1  2a,  6  5a2,  19  12c,  30  2a,  vii  18  21d,  20  3d,  90  3c2, 
*viii  100  2d,  ix  97  11a2,  x  61  21a  23a2,  *83  7b,  *85  27d,  132  3a. 
C1.  2D,  i  42  6a,  iv  7  2c,  v  17  4c,  38  lc,  52  lie,  viii  1  16d,  12  19d, 
46  31a3,  75  16c,  83  9c,  98  11c,    ix  48  5a,    x  25  lc  2c.  D2.    Before 

consonant-groups,  74  times:  6 A,  iii  38  2d,  iv  1*7  10a,  *v  40  6a3, 
vi  36  lb.  E2.    7B,  i  153  lc3,    ii  28  9a,    iii  4  9a,  6  2b,  55  la3  6a, 

vi  18  14a,  31  3c,  vii  20  5c,  38  6d,  45  3d,  x  1  6a,  *11  4d,  30  10a, 
33  lc,  113  8a:         5,  iv  31  6c,     viii  1  18a. 

1  Text  ddha.  3  Text  ddha.  3  Text  ddha  ydd. 

(iii)  yddl,  yddi:  A.  5b2,  i  173  8d,  x  115  lc:  61,  x  143  lc: 
10\  *x  12  3a.  B'.    2t,  i  168  8d,     iii  5  10c,  6  3c,     iv  41   3c, 

ix  72  2c,  86  6c,  *x  11  4c:  2d,  vi  42  3a,  viii  19  23a,  ix  99  2c: 
2T,  iii  5  8b,  *29  6a,  31  2c,  iv  21  8d,  vi  25  6b,  *vii  104  14a2*15b2, 
ix70  2d,  x*  129  7b2,  *16l  2b2:  4 A2,  i  56  4a,  iii  31  6a*  13a,  iv  21 
6a,  26  5a,  27  3b,    v  48  4c,    ix  86  46d,  97  22a1,    x  61  25a.  C.    2D, 

i  11  3c1,     ii  5  6a1,     viii  13  21a2,  32  6a2,  61  10b2,     ix  14  3c1,  15  3c1, 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


118  Imperatives  in  -dhi,  -hi 

47  4c1:         41,  v  74  5c,     ix  14  2a,     x  22  10c.  D2.     Before  con- 

sonant-groups, 9  times:  6A,  *i  161  8c,  v  3  10b,  vi  25  6d,  *x  95 
4b.  E2.     7B,  i  27  13c,  178  3d,     vi  22  4a,     vii  82  8b,  *104  15a, 

*viii  100  3b,     *x  16  3c,  *129  7d,     *161  lc*2a. 

1  Text  yddl.  2  Text  yddi. 

No  great  change  is  required  in  the  text,  but  the  long  vowel  should 
be  read  in  all  occurrences  in  groups  A  and  B,  and  probably  in  the 
positions  2D  and  4  also. 

The  Atharvaveda  has  almost  always  ddhd,  but  adyd  and  yddi. 

162.  The  imperative  forms  in  -dhi  -hi  are  regularly  short  in 
the  Rigveda:  but  srnudhi,  srnuhi,  srudhi  have  regularly,  and 
krdhi,  jahf  most  commonly,  long  final  vowels.  The  quantity  of 
forms  in  -ahi  is  uncertain. 

(i)  The  forms  srnudhi,  srudhi  occur  very  commonly  followed  by 
the  word  hdvam,  but  the  value  of  the  final  syllable  is  the  same  in  all 
cases.  The  only  exception  is  srudhi  viii  66  12d  (5),  where  the  words 
should  perhaps  be  rearranged. 

(ii)  The  forms  krdhi,  jahi  are  exceptionally  found  as  follows : 
krdhi  vi  47  lOd  (6A),  viii  96  8c  (CyA);jahi  vi  44  17a  (7B),  viii  53  4a  (7B). 

(iii)  Forms  in  -uhi  (except  srnuhi,  in  which  the  final  vowel  is 
always  long)  occur  as  follows:  A.  3d,  vi  53  4b:  61,  vi  45  14c, 
viii  45  22c:        8,  vi  25  3d',  44  9c,    vii  25  2c,    ix  91  4b.  B.    4A, 

i  54  9c:         7A,  18  times.  C.     Final,  10  times.  D.    Before 

groups,  9  times.  E.     5,  i  13  2c.     Distinct  evidence  of  quantity 

is  wanting,  but  the  prevalence  of  occurrences  in  the  position  7 A  as 
compared  with  8,  for  which  otherwise  these  forms  are  equally  suitable, 
and  the  rather  frequent  occurrences  before  consonant-groups,  suggest 
that  the  vowel  was  generally  regarded  as  short.  The  long  vowel, 
however,  may  reasonably  be  restored  in  the  occurrences  in  group  A. 

1  The  text  has  -ulv. 

(iv)  Of  other  forms  in  -dhi,  -hi  the  occurrences  in  positions 
favouring  short  quantity  greatly  preponderate,  but  the  restoration  of 
a  long  vowel  is  very  probable  in  the  positions  of  group  A,  and  also  in 
the  positions  2t,  2d.  Such  occurrences  are:  A.  3d,  viii  65  5c1: 
5b,  *x  10  10c2:  8,  ii  26  2a14,  vii  1  3a3,  viii  60  6a3:  10,  iii  54 
22d4.  B.    2t,  i  129  11a5,  *164  40cs,  189  4a5,     ii  11   17d7,     vi  2 

lie8,  vii  1  13a5,  viii  3  12a9  12c10,  96  10d",  ix  89  7c10,  *x  51  5a1: 
2d,  i  27  3c5,  36  15a5,  129  9b7,  *133  2c12,  iii  45  lb7,  iv  48  Id7,  viii  3 
11a9,  46  25b7,  60  9a5  9d5,  78  10d13,  93  31b7. 

For  viddhi  tu  vii  31  4c  viddhi  tti  is  a  probable  reading,  see  §  173  iii. 

1  ilu.       2  barbrhi.       3  dldihi.      4  dhdihl.      5  pdhi.      6  addhi.      7  yaJu.      s  villi. 
9  gagdht.         10  sagdhi.         n  dhehi.         12  chindhi.         13  pRrdhi.         14  viln. 

163.  There  remain  for  consideration  a  number  of  final  vowels 
of  which  the  quantity  is  regularly  short,  both  according  to  the 
metre  and  the  text :  but  they  appear  frequently  in  certain  positions 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Short  finals  protracted  119 

in  which  the  long  quantity  is  otherwise  favoured.  It  is  difficult 
to  decide  to  what  extent  these  variations  are  the  result  of  metrical 
laxity,  or  are  due  to  some  reminiscence  of  archaic  long  quantity 
or  other  phonetic  cause.  It  is  however  clear  that  there  are  certain 
positions  in  the  verse  to  which  long  final  vowels  are  admitted  more 
readily  than  other  long  syllables,  and  those  which  belong  to  certain 
endings  more  readily  than  other  long  final  vowels.  The  special 
positions  may  be  termed  positions  of  protraction,  and  the  special 
endings  described  as  capable  of  protraction.  Endings  capable  of 
protraction  fall  into  two  groups. 

The  first  group  consists  of  words  which  are  usually  of  more 
than  two  syllables,  and  are  most  commonly  found  before  the 
caesura  and  at  the  end  of  the  verse.  The  final  syllable  in  this 
group  is  protracted  in  the  eighth  place  of  trimeter  verse.  The 
forms  are  (i)  the  first  person  plural  (other  than  of  perfects)  in  -ma; 
(ii)  the  second  and  third  persons  singular  of  the  perfect  in  -tha, 
-a ;  (iii)  the  thematic  and  perfect  imperative  in  -sva ;  and  (iv)  the 
instrumental  of  nouns  in  -ena. 

The  second  group  consists  of  words  which  are  disyllables,  and 
are  usually  found  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse:  they  appear 
therefore  as  protracted  in  the  second  place,  especially  if  the  third 
syllable  is  short.  The  forms  are  (i)  paroxytone  adverbs  in  -tra,  as 
ydtra,  tdtra ;  (ii)  pronominal  instrumental  in  -ena,  as  yena,  tena ; 
and  (iii)  disyllabic  stems  appearing  as  the  prior  elements  of  com- 
pounds and  derivatives,  as  in  indra-vat,  sumna-yu. 

We  observe  at  once  that,  as  nearly  all  the  words  have  long  penult, 
the  final  vowel  cannot  ordinarily  occur  in  any  of  the  positions  of 
group  A  except  8.  The  regular*  short  quantity  is  however  easily 
demonstrated,  as  in  the  next  section. 

The  text  only  occasionally  gives  long  quantity  in  the  positions 
2T,  2D,  and  in  order  to  simplify  the  discussion  we  shall  disregard  the 
occurrences  in  these  positions,  and  assume  the  final  vowels  then  to  be 
short. 

Group  I. 

(i)  Protracted  forms  of  the  first  person  plural  in  -ma  occur  28  times 
in  the  eighth  place,  being  in  the  proportion  of  almost  50  in  1000,  as 
follows :  8,  i  73  9b,  94  lb  Id  2d  3d  4a,  132  lb1  If,  165  7c,  ii  2  10b, 
33  4a,  iii  33  10a,  iv  10  Id,  *58  2a  *2b,  v  3  6a1,  42  6b,  45  5b  6a, 
vii  27  5b\  57  4c,  viii  25  22c1,  x  2  2c,  63  lOd  14d,  80  7b,  111  lc, 
148  Id1.     Also  2t,  vii  20  8dx:         2d,  viii  63  10c1. 

The  corresponding  dual  form  in  -va  is  never  protracted. 
1  The  text  has  -ma. 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


120  Disyllables  with  protraction 

(ii)  The  perfect  forms  in  -tha  (2  pers.)  and  -a  (3  pers.)  are  protracted 
in  the  8th  place  18  times,  being  in  the  proportion  of  25  in  1000,  and 
7  times  elsewhere. 

The  occurrences  are:  -tha;  8,  ii  9  3c,  *viii  48  9b,  *x  180  2b: 
2d,  vi  16  3a1,  viii  24  24a1 :  '  4b,  vii  37  3a.  -a;  8,  i  31  5c,  145  la, 
ii  23  13d,  v  1  5d,  45  6d,  vi  1  6b  9c,  vii  18  24b,  viii  29  2a2,  ix 
70  9d,  x  5  5b,  67  6b,  111  2d  4c,  *181  Id:  2t,  i  122  9d2,  viii  61 
12c:         2d,  i  25  8c  9c. 

Perfects  of  verbs  in  -a,  as  paprd  i  69  lb,  jahci  viii  45  37c,  have 
always  -a,  and  are  not  included  above. 

1  vettha.  2  The  text  has  -a. 

(iii)  The  thematic  imperatives  in  -sva  (with  which  we  include 
perfect  forms  like  dadhisvd)  are  protracted  9  times  in  the  eighth  place, 
being  in  the  proportion  of  20  in  1000.  The  occurrences  are  ii  33  2d, 
37  3b,  iii  60  5b,  vi  41  5c,  ix  80  4d,  90  4b,  97  44b  44d,  x  112  3d. 
Also  once  in  the  position  4b,  vi  23  8a. 

(iv)  The  instrumental  forms  of  nouns  in  -ena  are  protracted  in  the 
8th  place  24  times,  being  in  the  proportion  of  35  in  every  1000.  The 
instances  are  i  32  5c,  33  13b,  116  24a,  117  21c,  *164  30d  *38b,  iii  31 
12c,  32  2c,  iv  *18  5b,  34  8c,  39  3d,  vi  32  2a,  vii  18  17b,  viii  66 
9c1,  ix  70  2b,  80  lc,  84  5d,  96  17c,  *x  42  lOd,  56  3a,  *88  4b,  111  2c, 
*139  4b,  *180  lc.  There  is  also  an  occurrence  in  the  sixth  place  of 
epic  Anustubh,  *vii  55  7c. 

1  The  text  has  -ena. 

Group  II. 

(v)  The  paroxytone  adverbs  in  -tra  occur  in  the  positions  of 
protraction  38  times,  being  in  the  proportion  of  140  in  every  1000  : 
but  this  is  largely  accounted  for  by  the  grammatical  function.  The 
instances  are:  8,  iii  53  5b,  *vii  103  2d,  viii  15  12c:  2t,  i  115 
2c,  *163  4d,  *164  3d1  *21a  *33d,  iii  23  Id,  53  5c  6c,  iv  26  7c,  v  41 
17c,  44  9c  9d,  *vi  75  8c*llc,  vii  1  4c,  83  2a  2c  2d,  viii  20  6c,  x8 
6b,  *18  13d,  *28  8d,  42  4c,  *53  8c,  *71  2c,  *88  17a,  138  lc,  *149  2a: 
2d,  i  22  4b,    v  61  14b,   vi  16  17a1  17c,   viii  34  3a,   ixlll2e,    *x  72  7c. 

1  The  text  has  -tra. 

(vi)  The  pronominal  instrumental  yena,  kena,  te'na  occur  in 
positions  of  protraction  37  times,  being  in  the  proportion  of  200  in 
every  1000,  largely  accounted  for  as  in  the  last  section.  The  instances 
are :  2t,  i  117  2d1,  165  2d1,  183  3c1,  186  5c1,  ii  17  6c,  24  lOd1,  iii  60 
2c1,  iv  36  9c1,  43  6d\  51  4c,  v  54  15b,  87  5c,  vi  49  5c1,  vii  1  24c1, 
21  6c,  41  5b1,  *101  3d1,  viii  3  9c  10a,  ix  108  4a,  x  *10  8da,  *52 
Id1,  *102  9c1,  *114  7dS  *121  5b1:  2d,  i  42  5c1,  50  6a,  vi  16  48c, 
*vii  55  7c,  viii  12  2a  2c,  17  10b,  19  20b,  20  26b,  67  6c,  ix  61  19b, 
x  126  2c.     yena  nu  may  be  restored  in  i  72  8d,  viii  12  4c. 

1  The  text  has  -ena. 

(vii)  Protraction  in  the  prior  elements  of  compounds  and  deriva- 
tives is  not  always  readily  recognized,  as  many  of  the  words  are  of 
comparatively  rare  occurrence.  The  instances,  according  to  the  dis- 
cussion in  £§  165-169  below,  are  as  follows,  including  a  few  instances 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Quantity  proved  by  statistics  121 

in  the  positions  6,  8,  and  10  :  6,  v  9  7a2,  ix  101  3a2:  8,  i  48  2a,B 
12c3:  10,  viii  60  13c5  14a6:  2t,  i  31  7c8,  48  2a3,  72  2c7,  83  la3, 
117  9d8,  118  9b8,  121  12d9,  122  7c'  8d3,  123  12a3,  140  13a2,  ii  32 
2d10,  iii  51  2c11,  iv  42  9d9,  v  8  7b'°,  30  lb13,  36  ed1,  58  6b'4, 
vi  1  7b10,  17  lid9,  vii  41  7a3,  71  3b10,  72  lb3,  100  2d3,  viii  20  2aM, 
ix  74  5b15,  97  26a15  49c2  51a2,  104  2c15,  110  lie'1,  x  *15  9a8,  36  8b,B, 
40  5d3,  48  7b2,  76  4d15,  78  lb15,  91  15c11,  *101  Id4,  *109  lcu,  160  lb13: 
2d,  ii  41  10b2,  iv314a2,  v  35  5c13,  61  13b17,  vi  16  14c9,  vii  32  24a2, 
viii  38  2b9,     ix  100  la2,     *x  97  7a3. 

1  Srutdratha,  §  166  vii.  3  abhi,  §  167  iii.  3  dsvavant,  §  168  ii. 

4  indravant,  ib.  5  prdti,  §  167  v.  6  tatrsand,  §  169  iii.  7  sramayii, 

§  168  iii.  8  ahihdn,  §  166  vii.  9  vrtrahdn,  ib.  10  sumnaydt,  mmnayii, 

§  168  iii.  n  vdjasdni,  §  166  vii.  12  sukhdratha,  ib.  13  sarvarathd,  ib. 

14  vllii-,  §  166  iv.  15  devavi,  §  166  vii.  16  devdvant,  §  168  ii.  17  tvesdratha, 
§  166  vii.  18  «*-,  §  167  v. 

164.  The  conclusions  reached  in  the  preceding  sections  are 
generally  confirmed  by  a  close  examination  of  the  statistics  of  the 
use  of  words  and  forms  of  the  different  groups.  Thus  the  use 
of  the  forms  included  in  §  158  differs  only  slightly  from  that  of 
ordinary  long  final  vowels:  the  forms  included  in  §159  appear 
much  more  frequently,  but  still  only  occasionally,  in  the  positions 
which  favour  short  quantity.  The  adverbs  named  in  §§160,  161 
are  found  in  all  positions,  but  several  shew  a  preference  for 
those  that  favour  short  quantity.  All  the  remaining  forms  in 
their  general  use  agree  with  those  that  have  short  final  vowels : 
yet  there  remains  a  substantial  difference,  which  indicates  that 
'  protraction '  is  not  a  mere  theory  of  an  editor,  but  corresponds  to 
some  special  characteristic  of  the  forms  concerned. 

The  table  that  follows  hardly  needs  explanation  so  far  as  the  first 
three  groups  are  concerned.  In  the  first  two  the  occurrences  in  group 
A  are  far  more  numerous  than  those  in  group  E,  and  similarly  those 
in  B  than  those  in  ~D ;  also  the  quantity  of  a  following  third  syllable  is 
indifferent,  and  the  position  before  an  early  caesura  twice  as  common  as 
before  a  late  caesura.  In  the  group  of  adverbs  (§§  160,  161)  all  these 
signs  disappear.  In  all  the  'forms  capable  of  protraction'  (§  163)  we 
observe  that  the  long  third  syllable  and  the  position  before  a  late  caesura 
are  greatly  favoured,  and  so  far  short  vowels  are  indicated.  Yet  the 
longer  words  appear  ten  times  as  often  in  group  A  as  ordinary  short 
vowels,  although  they  can  (as  a  rule)  only  appear  in  the  eighth  place 
(§  163).  The  treatment  of  such  forms  as  ydtra,  ytna  comes  out  most 
clearly  when  they  are  compared  with  other  words  like  dpa,  utd,  ydsya 
(with  kdsya  and  tdsya)  which  have  much  the  same  form  and  grammatical 
function.  Even  when  we  include  amongst  the  latter  the  forms  that 
appear  as  dpo,  utb  in  the  text  (see  §  171  iv),  a  marked  difference 
remains  in  the  distribution  between  the  groups,  and  indicates  that  the 
1  vowels  capable  of  protraction '  were  also  not  considered  very  suitable 
for  the  positions  of  short  quantity. 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


122  Table  of  the  variant  final  voivels 

Distribution  of  variant  final  vowels  in  the  Rigveda. 


Decisive  positions 

In  2nd  place 

Before 
caesura 

A 

B 

D 

E 

2td 

2TD 

4A 

5B 

All  long  vowels 
All  short  vowels 

1000 
1000 

201 

7 

355 

77 

22 
236 

1 
291 

84 
17 

77 
30 

121 

24 

70 
64 

§158 

Perfects  in  -a,  etc. 
Aorist  impv.  -sva 
Gerunds  in  -tya,  -yd 
Endings  -tarl,  -ti,  etc. 
Adverbs 

Total 

163 

69 

85 

125 

538 

22 
3 

8 

8 

35 

50 
32 

18 

18 

249 

4 
1 
2 
2 
15 

1 
0 
4 
0 
4 

13 
23 

1 

7 

114 

15 

14 

2 

12 

121 

4 

4 

15 

10 

43 

11 
2 
6 
6 

18 

980 

76 

367 

24 

9 

158 

164 

76 

43 

§159 

Imperative  in  -a 
2  pi.  -tM,  -td 

,,     -thand,  -tand 
Neut.  pi.  -a,  -i,  -u 

Total 

1177 
707 
129 
203 

146 

141 

14 

25 

332 

140 

11 

66 

33 

40 

1 

6 

40 

43 

3 

6 

104 

17 

0 

25 

114 

14 

0 

31 

108 

61 

6 

16 

43 

38 

0 

17 

2216 

326 

549 

80 

92 

146 

159 

191 

98 

§160 

tu,  tn 

38 

1 

23 

8 

3 

16 

7 

1 

0 

nu,  nu 

215 

22 

37 

30 

13 

6 

14 

15 

7 

u,  u 

387 

38 

47 

171 

44 

13 

30 

10 

0 

Stt,   8U 

208 

14 

49 

36 

22 

19 

21 

13 

6 

§161 

adya,  adyd 

184 

11 

31 

8 

7 

10 

14 

14 

39 

ddhd,  ddha 

182 

5 

68 

78 

18 

40 

42 

0 

0 

yddi,  yddi 

Total 

68 

4 

30 

13 

10 

10 

18 

10 

0 

1282 

95 

285 

344 

117 

114 

146 

63 

52 

§162 

Impv.  in  -uhi,  -hi,  -dhl1 

870 

13 

108 

60 

149 

23 

33 

36 

33 

§163 

1  pi.  -ma 
Perfect  -tha,  -a 
Impv.  -sva  (thematic) 
Instr.  -ena  (nouns) 

Total 

533 
539 
387 
505 

28 

18 

9 

25 

34 
45 
22 

67 

19 

16 

6 

38 

67 

52 

54 

109 

2 
6 
0 
0 

6 

12 

0 

0 

28 
31 
20 
64 

85 
91 
59 
72 

1964 

80 

168 

79 

282 

8 

18 

143 

307 

Adverbs  in  -tra 
Instr.  -ena  (pronouns) 

Total 

224 
166 

3 
0 

93 
93 

9 
13 

15 
12 

35 
37 

59 

82 

25 

8 

51 
4 

390 

3 

186 

22 

27 

72 

141 

33 

65 

§171 

dpa,  dpo 
utd,  utd 
ydsya,  etc. 

Total 

167 
704 
263 

4 
2 

0 

11 
114 

44 

101 
212 

77 

35 

218 

72 

2 
65 
13 

19 

104 

54 

1 
5 
2 

0 

1 

23 

1134 

6 

169 

490 

325 

80 

177 

8 

24 

§172 

Hiatus  after  -« 

218 

16 

71 

8 

30 

9 

14 

48 

48 

1  omitting  krdhi,  jahi,  srnudhi,  srnuhi  and  srudhi  (§  162). 


Variant  final*  in  composition  123 

165.  In  the  quantity  of  the  final  vowels  of  the  prior  elements  of 
compounds  and  derivatives  the  Samhita,  text  is  in  geueral  agree- 
ment with  the  metre,  and  doubtful  cases  are  rare.  Owing  again 
to  the  complexity  of  the  conditions,  it  is  not  easy  to  classify  the 
occurrences  or  to  treat  them  in  a  systematic  way :  but  it  may  be 
recognized  that  the  quantity  of  the  final  vowel  depends  partly 
upon  the  historical  character  of  the  prior  element,  and  partly  upon 
the  phonetic  character  of  the  initial  sound  of  the  posterior  element, 
besides  any  other  influences  that  may  be  at  work.  It  will  be 
convenient  to  consider  separately:  (i)  compounds  in  which  the 
prior  element  is  a  noun  or  numeral;  (ii)  compounds  with  pre- 
positions and  particles ;  (iii)  vowels  preceding  derivative  suffixes ; 
and  (iv)  the  augment  and  the  vowel  of  reduplication.  The  phonetic 
influence  of  v  following  will  in  each  class  claim  special  attention  : 
in  addition,  it  is  possible  that  y  r  I  s  and  m  produce  in  certain 
groups  of  .words  some  effect  in  the  direction  of  lengthening. 

166.  In  compounds  of  which  the  prior  element  is  a  noun 
(including  adjectives,  pronouns,  and  numerals),  the  final  syllable 
of  that  element  is  long  (i)  if  it  is  a  case-form,  as  aksnayddruh, 
Ctmdjur,  tudvrdha ;  (ii)  if  it  is  a  feminine  stem  in  -a  or  -%y  as  urvara- 
jit}  nadttama,  sendni ;  (iii)  in  most  proper  names,  as  lopdmudrd, 
visvdmitra ;  and  occasionally  (iv)  in  stems  in  -«,  uMkhala,  purii- 
tdma,  and  perhaps  (v)  in  stems  in  -an,  as  vrsdyudh.  The  prior 
element  (vi)  has  always  a  long  vowel  before  -vrdh  and  perhaps  in 
some  other  cases  before  v,  and  (vii)  is  occasionally  found  in  some 
other  words  in  positions  favouring  long  quantity. 

(i)  With  the  compounds  of  case-forms  are  included  those  of 
adverbs  which  have  flexional  endings,  as  in  evdvadd,  etddrs.  Such 
compounds  are  often  found  side  by  side  with  others  that  shew  the 
short  final  of  a  stem :    as  sandju  but  sanajd. 

Here  must  be  included  the  dvandva  duals,  the  prior  element  having 
usually  the  long  vowel  not  only  in  the  nom.  voc.  ace.  form,  but  also  in 
the  oblique  cases.  The  text  gives  regularly  indrdvisnu,  mitrdvdruiid, 
sUrydmdsd,  and  so  forth  :  and  indrdvdyU  must  in  all  instances  be 
restored,  as  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  it  never  stands  at  the  end  of 
Tristubh  verse,  or  in  any  other  position  in  which  a  is  favoured.  Other 
restorations  favoured  by  the  metre  are  mitrd . . .  vdruiiti  i  151  6b 
and  iv  1   18d  (2T,  7A),  mitrd-  v  62  3b  (2T),  66  6b  (2d). 

On  the  other  hand  we  always  find  the  triplet  varuua  mitra  aryaman 
with  the  singular  vocative  forms,  and  occasionally  the  pair  varuna 
mitra  in  the  same  shape,  as  i  122  7a  (7 A,  9):  cf.  vii  66  9ab.     mitra 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


124  Final  u  in  composition 

varuna  should  probably  be  restored  in  ii   41    4a,   v  64  4a,   67  5ab, 
vii  66   19a,   viii  25  4a,  72   17a,   101  3a:    and  see  further  §  174  ii. 

(ii)  The  text  probably  gives  dhdrdvard  correctly  in  ii  34  la  (2t), 
though  other  compounds  give  dhdra-.  In  i  43  4a  gdthdpati  should  be 
read  :  in  ii  41  16ab  (2d)  ambit  aim  devltame  corresponding  to  ndditame, 
and  vedudd  i  140  la  (2t),  iv  40  5b  (4b).     Cf.  §  170  iii. 

(iii)  Words  such  as  ugrddeva,  jardbodha,  ndrdmrhsa,  vd,rsdgird, 
visvtinara  come  under  this  heading,  independently  of  their  presumed 
derivation.  In  iii  18  4c  the  metre  suggests  visvdmitra,  but  correction 
is  not  justified  in  view  of  the  general  usage. 

(iv)  Of  final  -u  in  composition  there  are  many  traces  in  the  text, 
always  confirmed  in  the  metre,  as  urunasd,  ulukhala,  puriitdma, 
purui'dvas,  vibhdvasu,  vasftjti  :  whilst  other  words  have  -u,  as  isuhasta, 
gatuvid,  dasyuhdn.  The  long  vowels  may  be  connected  with  adverbial 
forms,  see  §  160  above.  Further  there  are  many  cases  in  which  the 
metre  suggests  the  restoration  of  u  regularly  or  occasionally,  as 
follows  : 

uru- :  perhaps  urukrt  in  the  single  occurrence  viii  75  lie  (2d),  and 
urdyuga  in  the  single  occurrence  viii  98  9b  (6). 

puru- :  the  compounds  have  commonly  u,  sometimes  ii.  The  words 
purutdma,  purubhuj,  are  sometimes  found  at  the  beginning  of  the 
stanza,  or  the  end  of  the  dimeter  of  Jagati  verse,  in  which  positions  u 
is  favoured ;  sometimes  after  an  early  caesura,  where  u  is  favoured  but 
is  not  certain.  In  purutdma  the  text  follows  the  metre  :  if  rightly,  we 
should  restore  purubhuj  in  i  3  lc  (2d),  v  73  lc  (6),  viii  8  17b  (6), 
10  6a  (10).  But  puriwdmi  has  always  the  long  vowel,  probably  even 
in  vi  22  4d,  vii  38  Id  (both  6A). 

madhu- :  the  compounds  have  regularly  u  :  the  metre  favours  u 
in  madhupfcam  ii  10  6d,  mddhumatl  iv  57  3a  and  madhuvfdham  x  75 
8d,  for  which  see  subsection  via. 

vasu-:  most  of  the  compounds  have  u;  but  u  should  probably  be 
restored  in  most  (if  not  all)  occurrences  of  vdsudhiti,  namely  i  128  8a 
(10),  181  Id  (2t),  iv  8  2a  (6),  48  3a  (6);  the  other  occurrences  are 
iii  31  17a  and  vii  90  3d  (both  6 A).  In  vasuruc  u  should  probably  be 
restored  in  the  single  occurrence  ix  110  6b  (2t),  and  in  vasuvid  the 
long  vowel  should  certainly  be  restored  in  the  majority  of  instances, 
the  following  v  being  an  accessory  cause,  namely  in  i  46  2c  (6),  viii  23 
16a  (6),  60  12d  (6),  61  5c  (10),  ix  101  lid  (6),  104  4a  (6),  x  42  3d 
(2t).  The  reading  of  the  text  is  only  supported  by  *i  164  49c,  vii  41 
6c,  ix  96  10a,  where  the  word  follows  an  early  caesura. 

vibhu-  should  be  restored  in  vibhusdh  for  vibhvdsdh  of  the  text  v  10 
7c  (3D),  ix  98  Id  (5). 

visu- :  visuvdt  and  visuvrt  are  regular,  but  visuanca  should  probably 
be  restored  for  visucind  in  *i  164  38c  (6 A),  as  visudriac  for  visvadriac 
in  vii  25  Id  (5A).' 

vilu-  is  regular,  and  it  is  therefore  hardly  safe  to  restore  vllu-  in 
vilupavi  v  58  6b  (2t),  viii  20  2a  (2t),  or  in  viluharas  *x  109  lc  (2t) 
these  appear  rather  to  be  instances  of  protraction  (§163  vii). 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Influence  of  initial  consonants  125 

(v)  The  final  syllable  of  a  stem  in  -an  seems  to  be  represented  by 
-a  in  vrmyHdh :  but  more  usually  appears  as  -a,  as  in  the  compounds 
of  brahina-.  The  metre  however  suggests  the  restoration  of  -a  in  the 
following  words:  ddsabhuji  i  52  11a  (10);  dlianvacard  v  36  lc  (2t)  ; 
satdpavitra  vii  47  3a  (2t)  and  satdbhuji  i  166  8a  (2t),  vii  15  14c  (6); 
sydmagabhasti  i  122  15d  (2t),  vii  71  3c  (2t),  syumagfblie  vi  36  2c  (2t), 
and  syfimarasmi  viii  52  2d  (2D).     See  also  §  174  i. 

(vi)  A  long  vowel  appears  more  or  less  regularly  when  the  second 
element  is  one  of  the  words  -vasu,  -v/dh,  -vrdha,  -magha  or  -sah. 

(a)  -vasu.  The  preceding  vowel  is  regularly  long,  often  with 
other  contributory  causes:  sahdvasu  ii  13  8a  (6A)  and  puruvdsu, 
when  it  also  follows  the  caesura  (see  subsection  iv),  are  only  doubtful 
exceptions. 

-vrdh.  A  long  vowel  is  found  in  annavfdh,  rtdvfdh,  rdum'dh, 
ahutivfdh,  girdvfdh,  ghrtavfdh,  tugridvfdh,  parvatavfdh :  but  mahivfdh, 
rayivfdh  are  equally  well  attested.  In  x  75  8d  (10)  madhuvfdh  may 
be  restored. 

-vrdha.  The  metre  favours  kavlvrdhd  viii  63  4a  (6),  but  is 
unsupported. 

(b)  -magha.  The  preceding  vowel  is  always  lengthened,  and 
therefore  tuvimaghd  v  33  6d  (6A)  should  probably  be  corrected. 

(c)  -sah.  The  preceding  vowel  is  regularly  long,  as  in  virasdh 
(§  178),  yajndsdh,  carsanlsdh:  but  short  in  nrsdh,  bhurisdh  and  a  few 
other  words. 

Probably  janasdh  should  be  restored  in  i  54  lib  (6A). 

(vii)  In  the  following  compounds  there  is  not  sufficient  evidence  to 
establish  the  existence  of  a  long  final  vowel,  but  the  syllable  in  question 
appears  with  some  regularity  in  ■  positions  of  protraction ' : 

devavl:  the  second  syllable  occurs  six  times  in  the  position  2t, 
namely  ix  74  5b,  97  26a,  104  2c,  x  36  8b,  76  4d,  78  lb;  six  times  in 
the  positions  2T,  2D,  and  nine  times  in  positions  in  which  a  short 
vowel  is  required.  As  to  a  possible  reading  devaviyam,  etc.,  see 
§  172  i. 

-ratha:  tvesdratha  v  61  13b  (2d),  irutdratha  i  122  7c  (2t),  v  36  6d 
(2t),  sarvarathd  v  35  5c  (2d),  x  160  lb  (2t),  sukhdratha  v  30  lb  (2t). 
In  candrdratha,  surdtha  the  short  vowel  is  usually  favoured. 

vajasdni  iii  51  2c  (2t),  ix  110  lie  (2t),  x  91  15c  (2t). 

-han  :  ahihdnam  i  117  9d  (2t),  118  9b  (2t),  but  ii  13  5b  (6 A),  19 
3b  (6A);  wtrahdnam  i  121  12d  (2t),  iv  42  9d  (2t),  vi  16  14c  (2d),  17 
lid  (2t),  viii  38  2b  (2d),  but  i  108  3b  (6B).  In  dasyuhdn  the  short 
vowel  is  usually  favoured. 

In  the  forms  pdvlru,  pdvirava,  j)dv%ravat,  tuvlrdva,  tuvlrdvat  there 
is  no  lengthening  of  i  before  r  in  a  compound,  but  a  stem  development 
such  as  is  found  in  gabhird,  sdrira. 

167.     In  compounds  of  which  the  prior  element  is  a  preposition 
or  particle,  with  which  may  be  considered  certain  combinations  of 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


126  Prepositions  and  prefixes 

prepositions  with  nouns  and  finite  verbs,  the  phonetic  character 
of  the  second  element  seems  to  be  of  chief  importance.  Thus 
(i)  many  prepositions  appear  to  have  long  final  syllables  before 
-vrta  and  some  other  words  beginning  with  v :  (ii)  dpd  is  found 
in  the  combination  dpd  vrdhi :  (iii)  abhi  is  occasionally  supported 
by  the  metre  in  abhlyuj,  and  is  found  in  the  text  in  combinations 
such  as  abhi  nardh,  abhi  navante,  abhi  sdt :  (iv)  the  negative  a-  is 
regularly  long  in  dvrta  and  frequently  in  arista  and  cognate  forms, 
and  in  dsat.  There  occur  also  (v)  some  other  irregularities  which 
cannot  be  classified. 

All  the  prepositions  and  particles  with  which  we  are  concerned 
have  ordinarily  short  final  vowels,  so  that  the  questions  that  arise  have 
to  do  with  occasional  long  quantity.  Amongst  the  occurrences  of 
prepositions  are  included  such  forms  as  dpo,  upo,  saho  of  the  text,  for 
the  reasons  given  in  §  171  iv. 

(i)  The  compounds  dpi-,  abhi-,  pari-,  and  prd-vrta  always  occur 
where  the  long  vowel  is  favoured,  except  vii  27  2d  (6A) ;  cf.  d-v?*ta  in 
subsection  iv.  In  cognate  words  the  value  varies ;  thus  nivrta,  trivft 
and  suvft  are  regular,  but  we  find  dpdm-ti  viii  66  3c  (10),  abhlvartd 
*x  174  la  (2D),  dnapdrrt  vi  32  5c  (8),  x  89  3a  (8),  and  should  perhaps 
read  drwvrta  *iii  29  6c  (10)  and  suvlvfta  i  10  7a  (2d). 

Before  derivatives  of  vrj  the  long  vowel  is  less  certain  :  the  text 
has  apdrrktd,  ddsdpravarga,  prdvaryd,  auprdvargd :  we  should  perhaps 
restore  anapdvrjydn  i  146  3c  (3t)  and  parlvfjam  viii  24  24b  (6). 

The  text  has  further  adhrvdsd,  updvasu,  pratlvi,  prdvand,  prdvfs 
and  prdvrsina  quite  consistently  with  the  metre :  and  updvidd  viii  23 
3c  (2t)  and  parlvim  x  62  10a  (6)  are  restorations  favoured  by  the 
metre. 

(ii)  Long  quantity  is  given  in  the  text  and  supported  by  the 
metre  in  the  phrase  dpd  vrdhi,  which  occurs  i  7  6b  (6),  ii  2  7b  (10), 
iv  31  13a  (6),  vii  27  2d  (2t)  and  viii  23  29c  (10).  Otherwise  the  use 
is  that  of  a  short  vowel,  as  shewn  in  the  Table,  §  164. 

(iii)  The  metrical  use  of  abhiyiij  is  the  same  as  that  of  purubhuj 
(§  166  iv),  and  it  may  be  right  to  restore  abhlyuj  in  iii  11  6a,  viii  45 
8a,  ix  21  2a  (all  6).  On  the  other  hand  abhisdh  must  be  restored  in 
vii  4  8d  (6A).  The  general  use  hardly  justifies  us  in  keeping  the 
reading  abhi  where  it  stands  in  the  text  as  a  separate  word,  namely  in 
abhi  dud  x  48  7b  (2t),  abhi  nardm  ix  97  49c  (2t),  abhi  nardh  v  9  7a 
(6),  ix  101  3a  (6),  abhi  navante  ix  100  la  (2d),  abhi  nah  i  140  13a  (2t), 
iv  31  4a  (2d),  ix  97  51a  (2t),  abhi  sat  ii  41  10b  (2d),  vii  32  24a  (2d). 

For  abhi  nUb  ii  33  7d  (2t)  and  abhi  su  iv  31  3a  (2d),  viii  93  21a  (2d), 
*x  59  3a  (2d  with  hiatus)  abhi  nd,  abhi  su  are  probable  corrections. 

(iv)  The  metre  everywhere  supports  the  restoration  dvrta  for  dvrta, 
for  instance  in  i  133  7e  (6) :  cf.  subsection  i.  In  derivatives  of  ris  the 
value  is  optional :  the  negative  is  short  in  v  42  8a  (9),  vi  19  4d  (9)  and 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Influence  of  snffixes  127 

elsewhere,  but  long  in  i  63  5a  (8),  vi  24  9c  (8),  25  2a  (8)  and  regularly 
in  aristdtati  in  the  popular  Rigveda,  namely  in  *x  60  8e  =  *9e  =  *10d, 
*97  7d,  *137  4b  (all  3e).  In  tisat  the  metre  agrees  with  the  text  in 
supporting  the  long  vowel  in  v  12  4d  (2t),  *vii  104  12d  (10)  and 
perhaps  *13c  (7 A). 

(v)  Amongst  miscellaneous  variations  we  may  notice  a  long 
vowel  in  the  text  before  ruh,  rudh  in  anurud.fi,  uparuh,  vlrudfi,  quite 
consistently  with  the  metre;  oplju  ii  31  5b  (10)  and  nlhdrd  *x  82  7c 
(init.),  which  may  also  be  correct;  and  sii-  in  several  compounds 
(cf.  §  160  iv),  as  sundra,  sunfta,  subfiarva,  silmdya,  in  agreement  with 
the  metre. 

The  metre  favours  pratidhfse  viii  60  13c  (10)  14a  (10),  and 
visvasuvidah  i  48  2a  (8),  which  may  be  ranked  amongst  protracted 
vowels  (§  163  vii). 

The  words  prasdh,  suydvasa  have  in  the  text  pra-,  su-,  but  the  long 
quantity  is  inadmissible  except  in  prdsahdm  i  129  4b  (8)  and  suydvasa 
i  42  8a  (3d),  vi  27  7a  (8).  Thus  prasdh  is  required  in  vi  17  4d  (10), 
and  suydvasa  i  190  6a,  ii  27  13a,  *vi  28  7a,  vii  18  4a,  x  106  lOd 
(all  5A). 

168.  Before  suffixes  we  find  long  vowels  always  before  -van, 
but  short  vowels  regularly  before  -mant,  -vant,  except  where  the 
ending  is  -yavant  (-idvant) :  long  and  short  vowels  almost  in- 
differently in  derivatives  in  -ydnt,  -yd,  -yu  and  the  corresponding 
verbs  in  -y. 

(i)  Long  vowels  appear  to  be  found  regularly  before  the  suffix 
-van,  -vari,  as  rtdvan,  rnavdn,  sumndvdrl :  and  the  metre  suggests 
forms  such  as  maghdvanah  as  antecedent  to  maghonah  etc.,  the 
occasions  being  v  16  3a  (6),  86  3b  (6),  vi  65  3c  (2t),  ix  32  lb  (6). 
Accordingly  matsardvd  (from  a  stem  matsardvan)  is  a  probable  cor- 
rection in  ix  97  32c  (10). 

(ii)  On  the  other  hand  a  short  vowel  is  regular  before  -vant, 
unless  the  prior  element  contains  itself  a  long  vowel,  as  is  the  case  in 
words  like  tdvant,  svadhdvant,  pdtnlvant,  visiwdnt,  and  even  in  asthmhtt 
from  asthdn. 

Amongst  derivatives  of  nouns  in  -a  sutdvant  is  an  exception,  for 
both  text  and  metre  favour  the  long  vowel :  vayunavant  again  is 
correctly  given  in  iv  51  lb  (8),  and  should  be  restored  in  vi  21  3b 
(7A).  But  d.svavant,  indravant,  devdvant  have  regularly  a :  the 
occasional  a  of  the  text  needs  correction  in  dsvavant  i  30  17a  (5), 
i  53  5d  (6A),  indravant  iv  27  4a  (6A),  devdvant  (iv  26  6c,  10  but 
perhaps  misplaced)  :  the  other  occurrences  are  chiefly  in  the  second 
place,  and  perhaps  rank  with  the  protracted  vowels  (§163  vii). 

In  the  derivatives  of  feminine  nouns  in  -i  or  -7  the  short  vowel 
must  frequently  be  restored  :  thus  mktirant  v  31  6c  (2T)  and  *vi  75  9b 
(6A),  simivant  i  141  13a  (7B),  ii  25  3a  (7B),  v  56  3c  (9),  x  8  2b  (7B), 
78  3c  (10  in  irregular  ending),  89  5b  (4B),  sdptivant  vii  94  10c  (2D), 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


128  Vowels  of  reduplication 

x  6  6b  (7B),  hrsivant  ii  31  Id  (6 A) :  but  hrsivant  is  justified  in  i  127 
6f  (10). 

As  to  derivatives  in  -mant  it  need  only  be  noticed  that  vdsimant 
must  in  all  cases  be  restored :  it  occurs  i  42  6b  (5),  87  6c  (3T),  v  57  2a 
(2T)  and  x  20  6c  (6  in  Trochaic  Gayatri).     Cf.  §  170  iii. 

(iii)  In  the  formations  in  -ydnt,  -yd,  -yu  both  short  and  long  vowels 
are  found,  and  the  restoration  of  a  short  vowel  is  required  in  rjuyd 
i  183  5c  (7B :  it  is  probably  the  adverb  of  rju);  rtayu  perhaps  in  v  8 
la  (6A)  as  found  in  the  text  in  viii  70  10a  (7);  gdtuydnti  i  169  5d 
(6A);  vasuydnt,  vasuyu  as  optional  forms  in  i  130  6a  (7B),  ii  32  Id  (6A), 
iv  16  15a  (7B),  vi  51  12d  (7B);  satruydnt  in  vii  20  3d  (6 A).  Less 
certain  is  aghaydnt  iv  2  6d  (6A) ;  for  v  24  3b  see  §  192.  The  text 
gives  sumndydnt,  sumndyu  only  where  the  vowel  occurs  in  the  second 
place :  it  may  rank  with  the  protracted  vowels ;  so  too  a  possible 
restoration  of  sramayuvah  in  i  72  2c  (2T):  see  §  163  vii. 

169.  In  reduplication  a  long  vowel  is  found  (i)  in  many 
perfects  of  words  beginning  with  v,  as  vavakre,  vdvandhi,  vdvasuh, 
vdvasdnd,  vdvrje,  vdvrte,  vdvrdhijJi ;  (ii)  of  words  beginning  with  r, 
as  rdrand,  rdrahdnd ;  and  (iii)  of  some  other  words,  as  tdtrsdnd, 
ndndma.  Also  (iv)  in  disyllabic  reduplication,  and  (v)  in  the 
re-duplication  of  nouns,  and  in  the  intensive  verb-forms. 

The  augment  is  occasionally  long  before  v,  as  dvar,  dvidhat, 
dvidhyat  and  (more  rarely)  before  y  and  r. 

(i)  The  length  of  the  vowel  is  irregular,  but  the  text  usually 
agrees  with  the  metre.  A  long  vowel  is  more  common  if  a  heavy 
syllable  follows,  as  vdvrte  but  vavrtvdms. 

(ii)  From  rue  'shine'  rurucuh  is  suggested  by  the  metre  as  an 
optional  form,  in  iv  7  lc  (10),  x  122  5d  (10). 

(iii)  From  lean  cdkan-  is  regular :  cdkdnanta  should  be  restored 
i  169  4c  (5B)  (cf.  v  31  13a)  though  not  favoured  by  the  metre. 

From  tard  (trd)  tdtrddnd  should  perhaps  be  restored  in  iv  28  5d  (8) 
and  v  53  7a  (init.). 

From  tars  (trs)  tdtrsuh  tdtrsdnd  are  given  in  the  text  in  i  31  7c  (2t), 
173  lie  (6B),  ii'4  6a  (5 A),  *x  15  9a  (2t);  but  tatrsdnd  i  130  8f  (6B), 
vi  15  5d  (6B).  The  metre  seems  to  support  the  latter  form,  with 
i  31  7c  and  *x  15  9a  as  instances  of  protraction. 

From  dhar  (dhr)  the  text  has  dadhdra,  etc.  in  all  strong  forms : 
this  is  confirmed  by  the  metre,  for  the  word  never  stands  in  Tristubh 
cadence,  and  only  in  one  case,  ix  74  2d  (5A),  is  the  short  vowel 
metrically  preferable. 

From  nam  the  text  has  ndndma  i  48  8a  (5A),  ii  33  12b  (3t),  iv  25 
2a  (2T).     The  restoration  of  nandma  is  probable  in  the  first  instance. 

From  pi,  pi  the  text  has  plpdya,  but  pipdya  must  be  restored 
throughout. 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


The  augment  129 

From  yudh  yuyudhuh  is  a  probable  restoration,  though  we  have 
yuyodha  vi  25  5b  (9),  yuyudhdte  i  32  13c  (5A):  the  other  occurrences 
are  iv  30  3b  (6),  v  59  5b  (10),  vii  83  7b  (10). 

From  sah  the  text  has  sdsdha  and  so  forth,  but  sa-  is  preferable  in 
all  decisive  instances,  namely  in  i  100  5b  (5A),  132  lb  (5A),  ix  110 
12c  (5 A),  besides  the  two  in  which  the  text  has  sa-,  namely  viii  96  15d 
(9),  *x  180  la  (2T).  The  forms  sdsdhah,  sdsdlmt,  sdsahisthdh,  in 
which  sd-  has  really  the  long  vowel,  must  therefore  be  referred  to  a 
reduplicated  aorist  or  intensive  formation.     Cf.  pipdya,  plpdyat  above. 

(iv)  In  disyllabic  reduplication  i  is  always  long,  and  we  should 
therefore  read  ddvldhnat  viii  60  13b,  on  the  exact  analogy  of  tdvltuat 
iv  40  4c. 

(v)  In  nouns  the  vowel  of  reduplication  is  generally  long :  but 
tdturi  is  endorsed  by  the  metre  in  i  145  3c  (5A),  vi  22  2c  (5 A).  In 
the  remaining  occurrences  tdrutra  is  a  tempting  correction,  but  not 
altogether  necessary,  namely  in  iv  39  2d,  vi  24  2a,  68  7d. 

(vi)  The  augment  is  long  in  the  words  dvar,  dvidhat  (text 
dvidhat),  dvidhyat,  dvrnak  (text  varying),  dvrni ;    as 

dceii  citrd  vi  duro  na  dvah  i  113  4b 

tudm  putro  bhavasi  yds  ta  dvidhat  ii  1  9c 

kurusrdvanam  dvrni  x  33  4a 

But  avar  must  be  restored  i  92  4d  (9),  113  13b  (7B).  In  ii  17  6d 
(6B)  the  text  gives  dvrnak  with  some  support  from  the  metre. 

From  many  forms  even  of  the  same  verbs  the  augment  has  its 
regular  value,  as  avrnjan,  avrjan,  dvrkta. 

The  augment  also  appears  as  a-  before  y  in  dyukta  v  17  3b  (2T) 
and  dyunak  *i  163  2b  (10).  Similarly  before  r  we  find  drinak  ii  13 
5b  (8),  and  draik  occurs  several  times  in  positions  which  prove  the 
first  syllable  long. 

170.  With  very  few  exceptions  the  text  accurately  represents 
the  quantities  of  vowels  in  the  final  syllables  of  stems  before 
flexional  endings.  In  some  cases  however  the  metre  suggests 
restorations,  namely,  (i)  of  a  i  for  d  e  %  in  dual  verb-forms  before 
the  endings  -the,  -tef  -thdm;  (ii)  of  d  for  a  in  the  strong  cases 
of  usds,  and  of  a  for  d  in  the  declension  of  compounds  of  sdh,  some 
nouns  in  -an  and  -man,  and  the  adverb  visvdhd  (text  often  visvdhd), 
and  in  the  locative  case,  and  perhaps  in  the  vocative,  of  nouns 
in  -u ;  (iii)  of  i  for  %,  or  the  opposite,  in  the  declension  of  feminine 
nouns  in  ■*  -i\  and  (iv)  regularly  of  ri-  ru-  in  the  formation  of 
verbs  with  the  suffix  -na,  -ni. 

Nearly  all  these  points  admit  of  some  question,  as  the  number  of 
instances  is  not  very  large. 

(i)     The  occurrences  which  favour  the  short  vowel  are  as  follows : 
dsathe  i  2  8c  (7),  15  6c  (7),  151  8d  (11)  9a  (11),  v  67   Id  (7);  dsate 
For  inclex  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148, 
A.  9 


130  Stem  vowels 

i  25  6a  (7),  136  3d  (7),  144  6d  (11),  v  66  2b  (7),  viii  31  6b  (7); 
cisathe  i  182  3a  (11);  asate  ii  41  5c  (7);  cakrate  viii  29  9a  (6B) ; 
caksaihe  vii  70  5b  (7B)  (7);  dadhathe  i  151  9a  (6B) ;  yunjathe  i  151 
4d  (9),  v  74  3b  (5);  ucyate  (text  ucyete)  *x  90  lid;  vahathe  (-ethe) 
i  135  8a  (6B),  182  2c  (6B) ;  sobhate  \-ete)  iv  32  23c  (7);  yunjathdm 
iv  45  3b  (9);  rdsatham  i  46  6c  (5);  anusatdm  viii  8  12d  (7); 
trdsitham  iv  55  lb  (9),  v  41  lc  (9),  vii  62  4a  (9),  71  2d  (9). 

On  the  other  hand  the  long  quantity  given  in  the  text  is  quite 
admissible  in  asate  v  68  4b  (7g)  5c  (7g)j  dsathe  v  62  5d  (3T),  and  is 
required  by  the  metre  in  numerous  other  passages,  as  iyate  vii  39  2b 
(10),  dadhdte  i  185  2b  (10),  and  vasathe  i  152  la  (10). 

The  short  vowel  seems  therefore  to  be  an  archaism  which  is 
disappearing. 

(ii)  (a)  In  the  declension  of  usds  the  text  usually  gives  usdsam, 
usdsd,  usdsah  in  accordance  with  the  metre:  but  the  forms  usdsam,  usdsd, 
usdsah  are  favoured  by  the  metre,  and  usually  appear  in  the  text,  in 
the  following  passages  :  A.  8,  vii  99  4b,  x  35  2c:  10,  i  123  12d, 
124  9d  13b,  ii  28  9c,  iii  31  4c,  iv  3  lie,  5  13d,  12  2c,  v  1  lb, 
vi  30  5d,  65  4b,  72  2a,  vii  41  7a,  42  5c,  72  4a,  76  4d,  88  4d. 
B.  2d,  iv  30  9c:  2T,  iii  55  la,  viii  27  2b:  4B,  i  92  2c,  134  4a, 
v  80  lc,  vii  90  4a1,  x  39  lb,  *88  18b:  4b,  iii  20  la1,  v  28  lb1, 
vii  75  3b1,     viii  96  la:         7 A,  ii  12  7c1. 

In  addition  the  compounds  usdsandktd,  ndktosdsd  always  appear  at 
the  beginning  of  the  verse  :  the  text  gives  the  long  stem  vowel  in  both 
cases  :  the  metre  favours  it  in  the  first  compound,  and  is  indifferent  in 
the  second. 

1  The  text  has  umsam,  etc. 

(b)  In  the  declension  of  -sah  visvasdham  is  a  probable  correction 
in  vi  44  4c  (5)  and  satrasdham  in  viii  92  7a  (7). 

(c)  Probable  restorations,  chiefly  in  the  accusative  singular,  are : 
Stems  in  -man:  mahimdnam  (or  mahitvandm)  viii  46  3a  (7),  65  4a  (7) : 

pdrijmanam  viii  72  10b  (7):  purutmdnam  viii  2  38b  (7). 

Stems  in  -van :  anarvdiiam  ii  6  5b  (7),  vii  97  5d  (7a),  viii  92  8a 
(7);  dhitdvanam  iii  27  2c  (7),  40  3a  (7);  rathaydvana  viii  38  2a  (7); 
s'ubhrayavana  viii  26  19c  (7). 

Stems  in  -an:  tiymdmurdhanah,  vi  46  lid  (7);  perhaps  rdjanam 
v  54  7d  (6 A)  14d  (6A),  x  124  8c  (7B),  rdjana  x  61  23a  (7B?). 

The  regular  form  vfsanam  should  probably  be  restored  in  ix  34  3a 
(2D),  and  in  x  89  9d  (4b)  in  spite  of  the  metre  :  the  text  has  vfsanam, 
contrary  to  the  general  use.  For  neut.  pi.  -ami  there  is  no  sufficient 
evidence. 

(d)  A  form  visvdha  appears  somewhat  frequently  in  the  text, 
chiefly  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse,  by  the  side  of  visvdha.  Assuming 
that  the  final  a  is  justified  (for  which  point  see  §  158)  there  is  no 
metrical  occasion,  as  there  is  no  apparent  historical  justification,  for  a 
in  the  stem-ending. 

(e)  The   existence   of   a   locative   in   -av   from  -u  stems  is  only 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


-Locative  in  -av  131 

indirectly  recognised  in  the  text  in  the  form  sdno  in  the  combination 
sdno  tivye  or  sdno  avydye  in  bk  ix.  In  the  remaining  instances  which 
can  be  recognised  by  the  metre  the  text  regularly  gives  -av,  l&gt;efore 
consonants  -au.  The  locative  vdstav  however,  in  the  phrase  vdstav 
usrdh,  appears  as  vdstor  in  defiance  of  the  metre  in  some  passages,  and 
elsewhere  more  correctly  as  vdsta  usrdh  or  usrdh.  If  we  disregard  the 
varieties  of  spelling,  we  find  that  the  form  in  -av  is  considerably  more 
common  than  that  in  -av :  and  it  may  so  far  be  justified  historically, 
that  -av  stands  in  just  the  same  relation  to  -avi  as  -an  to  -ani. 

The  occurrences  are  as  follows:  A1.  3d,  v  52  7b:  5b,  ii  27  16d : 
6,  viii72  2b,    ix  63  8b,  65  16b:        10,  *x  167  4a.  B1.    2t,  i  126 

lb,     x  116  9b:         2D,  ix  11  5c.  C2.    5B,  x  123  2c.         3D,  viii 

45  41a,     ix26  5a.  E.     5,  viii  6  46b4:         9,  ii  39  3c5,    iv  25  2b5, 

45  5b5,  v  49  3b5,  vi  46  8a3,  vii  69  5a5,  viii  46  26a5,  ix  86  3c,  91 
lc,  92  4c,  96  13b,  97  3a  12d  16d  19b  40c,  x  40  2a5.  Similarly  from 
a  stem  in  -i  v  41  14d  (9). 

1  -/iv  is  correct.  2  From  this  point  -av  is  probable.  3  druhydv. 

4  pdrsav.  5  vdstav. 

{/)  A  vocative  in  -u  in  place  of  -o  of  the  text  seems  probable  in 
i  135  9a  (7a),  ii  13  13a  (6B),  viii  25  12c  (7B),  51  6a  (6B),  52  6a  (6B), 
70  7b  (5),  ix  97  17d  (9). 

(iii)  The  confusion  in  Vedic  Sanskrit  between  the  feminine  stems 
in  -i  and  -i,  and  the  frequent  transitions  from  the  former  class  to  the 
latter,  prepare  us  for  the  occasional  restoration  of  -i,  which  is  probable 
in  vasibhih  viii  7  32c  (7),  *x  101  10b  (2T):  see  also  §§  166  ii,  170  ii. 
On  the  other  hand  the  restoration  ndribhiah  is  required  in  i  43  6c  to 
account  for  the  form  -bhiah  (§  144). 

The  restoration  of  an  instrumental  in  -tl  for  -tya  has  already  been 
discussed  in  §  139  iii;  the  examples  are  given  on  p.  29  (A  5).  Similarly 
yuvateh  may  be  restored  for  yuvatydh  x  40  lib  (6A),  and  tdviseh  for 
tdvisyah  v  29  14d  (6 A).  In  all  these  cases  the  rarity  of  a  long  syllable 
in  the  second  place  after  the  caesura  is  the  justification  of  the  change. 

(iv)  From  ri,  rl  '  flow/  the  text  gives  ritui-,  rin%-  correctly  :  and 
the  short  vowel  must  regularly  be  restored  in  all  similar  formations,  as 
in  hrinati,  drundnd,  prindn,  bhrindnti,  srinlhi,  in  agreement  with  the 
history  of  the  forms. 

171.  To  complete  the  discussion  above  (§  160)  of  the  particle 
u  u,  and  as  a  preliminary  to  the  study  of  the  quantity  of  final  long 
vowels  before  hiatus,  it  is  necessary  to  investigate  the  relation 
of  the  endings  -av  -o  in  the  text  of  the  Rigveda  to  final  -a,  as 
well  as  the  relation  of  the  disyllabic  ending  -a  u  to  final  -ai, 
-au,  and  ah.  Final  -av  regularly  appears  in  place  of  a  dual  in  -a 
before  hiatus  (except  before  u-),  even  when  the  syllable  is  short. 
Final  -o  is  of  various  origin:  sometimes  it  must  be  resolved 
into  -a  u  or  -a  u,  the  latter  element  being  the  particle  u  or  u; 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 

9—2 


132  Final  -av  and  -o 

sometimes  it  represents  a  modification  of  final  -a  or  a  in  an  adverb, 

which  has  the  effect  of  making  the  final  syllable  exempt  both  from 

combination  and  from  shortening  where  a  vowel  follows,  this  use 

being  almost  restricted  to  the  later  parts  of  the  Rigveda:  and 

lastly,  it  is  used  as  a  textual  correction  of  -a  or  -a  in  forms  of  all 

kinds,  with  the  intention  of  disguising  hiatus  or  consecutive  short 

syllables  in  the  second  and  third  places.     The  combination  -a  u 

represents  occasionally  final  -ai,  -au,  or  -ah,  in  all  positions  in  the 

verse. 

(i)  In  about  15  instances  (§  174  i)  the  final  syllable  of  a  dual  in 
-av  is  shewn  by  the  metre  to  be  short,  just  as  in  the  locatives  in  §  170 
ii  e.  Only  in  one  instance  is  such  a  dual  written  in  combination, 
namely  in  vi  63  la.  This  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  in  an  earlier 
state  of  the  text  the  duals  in  -a  were  rightly  distinguished  according  as 
hiatus  or  combination  took  place,  and  that  a  later  and  mechanical 
revision  has  substituted  -av  for  the  ending  before  hiatus,  without 
regard  to  the  quantity.  Of  a  dual  in  -au  becoming  automatically  -av 
before  vowels  there  is  no  trace  in  the  Rigveda  proper,  for  final  -au 
becomes  regularly  either  -a  or  -a  u,  as  shewn  below  (subsection  v). 

(ii)  Final  -o  usually  appears  in  the  Pada-patha  as  -o  iti,  but  this  is 
no  satisfactory  indication  of  its  origin  or  value,  for  even  vocatives  in  -o, 
as  indo  (indav)  appear  as  indo  iti.  If  however  we  exclude  final  -o  as 
representing  -ah,  and  also  the  vocatives,  we  find  that  in  all  other 
instances  the  vowel  in  the  Rigveda  is  not  capable  either  of  combination 
or  of  shortening  before  vowels  :  and  as  it  usually  ends  the  first  word  in 
a  clause,  it  may  be  conceived  as  resulting  from  the  combination  of 
final  -a  or  -a  with  the  particle  u.  This  explanation  however  owes  its 
attractiveness  to  the  theory  of  the  Pada-patha,  represented  by  its 
writing  urn  iti,  that  the  particle  u  has  a  special  character  as  pragrhya 
or  uncombinable.  As  this  is  hardly  the  case  (see  §  173  iv),  there  is  no 
immediate  reason  to  assume  the  presence  of  the  particle  except  where 
the  metre  requires  the  restoration  of  an  additional  syllable,  namely  in 
6  (d  u)  vii  40  la,  viii  7  33a,  22  la;  go  (ca  u)  vi  66  3b;  no  (nd  u) 
*x  86  2c;  pro  (prd  u)  i  186  10a,  vi  37  2a,  viii  62  la,  ix  89  la; 
mo  (md  u)  i  38  6a;  hdnto  (hdnta  u)  viii  80  5a.  In  i  186  10a,  viii  62 
la,  *x  86  2c,  the  ii  thus  obtained  stands  with  hiatus  before  a  vowel 
following  (§  124). 

(iii)  Final  -o  represents  a  phonetic  developement  of  a,  incapable  of 
combination  or  shortening,  certainly  in  dtho,  probably  also  in  mo  and 
no.  The  genuineness  of  the  form  dtho  is  shewn  first  by  its  appearing 
only  in  the  popular  Rigveda  and  the  Atharvaveda,  whereas  all  revisions 
of  the  text  of  the  Rigveda  have  been  carried  through  the  whole  of  it : 
and  secondly  by  its  use  before  vowels  and  consonants  alike,  although 
in  the  latter  case  no  metrical  advantage  is  obtained.  Again  dtho  does 
not  stand  for  dthd  u,  for  in  no  instance  is  it  equivalent  to  dtha  u  with 
hiatus,  and  it  cannot  be  equivalent  to  dtha,  u  combined  in  the  Atharva- 
veda, for  in  that  case  there  would  be  almost  as  many  occurrences  of 
the  particle  u  in  this  one  combination  as  in  all  other  possible  positions. 


Final  -o  133 

which  is  contrary  to  the  principle  of  quantitative  evidence.  It  follows 
that  dtho  is  a  real  phonetic  developement  of  dthd ;  and,  if  so,  it  is 
impossible  that  the  later  tendency  to  shorten  the  word  to  dtha  can 
have  been  at  work  at  this  period. 

The  cases  of  mo  and  no  are  not  quite  so  clear,  but  are  generally 
similar.  In  one  instance  mo  is  to  be  resolved  into  m&amp;  u  (subsection  ii) : 
in  addition  it  is  used  twenty  times  initially,  usually  without  metrical 
advantage,  seven  instances  being  in  the  popular  Rigveda  (*i  50  13d, 
*ix  114  4d,  x  *27  20b,  *59  4a  8e  =  9f  =  lOf)  and  only  twice  elsewhere 
in  the  verse,  namely  in  v  31  13b  (6B),  *x  18  13b  (8).  So  in  one 
instance  no  stands  for  nd  u :  otherwise  it  occurs  ten  times  in  the 
popular  Rigveda,  and  only  twice  outside  it,  namely  in  iv  21  9c  (8), 
and  vi  54  3d  (init.).  Both  words  occur  occasionally  before  vowels, 
and  then  are  neither  combined  nor  shortened. 

(iv)  Much  more  frequently,  it  seems  probable  that  final  -o  of  the 
text  represents  the  result  of  a  metrical  revision  of  final  -a  or  -a,  and  is 
betrayed  as  such  by  its  systematic  use  in  positions  in  which  it  is 
metrically  convenient,  that  is,  before  hiatus,  and  (in  the  case  of  -a)  in 
the  positions  2t,  2d.  Such  a  revision  must  have  been  the  work  of  a 
later  hand  than  that  which  recorded  the  value  of  the  'protracted 
vowels,'  and  has  not  as  much  historical  justification.  For  in  the  case 
of  the  protracted  vowels  it  appears  that  the  words  received  special 
treatment  from  the  bards  (Table,  §  164):  but  the  words  in  which  -o 
appears  are  used  exactly  as  ordinary  words  with  final  short  or  long 
vowels  respectively.  As  examples  we  may  take  the  three  words  which 
appear  most  commonly,  dpo,  utb,  and  upo. 

Of  these  utb  appears  always  initially,  and  before  consonants 
40  times  j  in  34  instances  the  next  syllable  is  short.  On  the  other 
hand  utd  appears  88  times  initially,  and  in  79  of  these  the  next 
syllable  is  long.  It  is  clear  then  that  utb  stands  according  to  a  system 
before  short  third  syllables.  That  this  system  was  that  of  the  bards 
themselves  seems  improbable  :  and  the  more  so,  because  we  find  utb 
nu  vi  47  lc,  viii  25  23c,  72  6a  18a,  94  6a,  where  nu  may  be  read, 
and  utb  nu  cit  viii  40  10c  lie,  utb  ghd  vii  29  4a,  indicating  that  the 
editor  concerned  reckoned  nu,  gha  as  short  syllables,  although  nu  cit, 
ghd  are  the  regular  forms.  Further  the  general  practice  of  the  poets 
(§  157)  does  not  lead  us  to  expect  that  utd  would  be  followed  by  a  long 
third  syllable  in  so  high  a  proportion  of  the  occurrences  as  90  per  cent. 

Further  dpo  occurs  four  times  before  consonants:  in  three  cases 
the  following  third  syllable  is  short,  but  in  viii  67  15a  the  metrical 
difficulty  is  easily  removed  by  reading  dpa  su.  upo  occurs  thirteen 
times  before  consonants,  in  all  cases  but  one  in  the  position  2t  or  2d, 
but  the  metre  can  be  corrected  by  reading  upa  sti  in  i  82  la,  viii  103 
lc,  ix  61  13a. 

In  other  words  ending  in  -o  for  -a  the  usage  is  the  same,  and 
though  the  particle  u  may  in  some  cases  be  present,  the  restoration  of 
final  -a  seems  generally  most  probable,  with  such  consequent  corrections 
as  ihd  sti  ix  65  5c,  kena  nu  viii  66  9c,  tdtra  su  i  37  14c,  bhuytima  sti 
iv  32  6a,  and  sahd  su  viii  7  32a.     The  chief  exception   (besides  no 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


134  Phonetic  u 

subs,  iii  above)  is  pro,  which  seems  very  frequently  to  stand  for  prd  u, 
except  in  *i  161  12d,  where  prd  should  be  restored. 

Where  -o  stands  for  -a  (as  in  eto,  evo,  katho,  tdpo)  either  a  vowel 
follows  or  one  of  the  particles  nu  or  su.  In  the  latter  alternative  u  is 
probably  contained  :  in  the  former  it  is  more  than  doubtful. 

(v)  Since  the  particle  u  u  a,s  such  is  regularly  the  second  word  in 
the  clause,  or  at  latest  the  third  when  the  second  word  is  a  similar 
particle,  it  must  be  clearly  distinguished  from  the  u  which  attaches 
itself  to  certain  verb  and  noun  endings,  and  therefore  regularly  appears 
later  in  the  sentence.  This  is  the  case  with  the  ending  -tavai  {-tavd  u), 
with  the  words  asau  (asd  u),  vai  {yd  u),  and  with  the  nom.  sing,  and 
other  endings  in  -ah  (-a  u). 

The  occurrences  are 

-tavd  u :  i  *24  8b,  *164  5d  *28b,  iv  21  9d,  *58  9a,  v  2  10b,  29  2d, 
31  4d,  *83  10b,  vii  4  8b,  44  5b. 

vdu:  *i  162  21a,  ii  33  9d,  v  73  9a,  vii  85  2a,  *104  13a,  viii  23 
13a,  62  12a,  *ix  112  la,  *x  10  12a,  *27  5a,  *117  la,  *137  6a, 
*142  3a. 

asd  u  :  v  17  3a. 

-d  u  (nom.  sing,  or  pi.):  i  156  lb  (evayd  u),  168  lb  (devayd  u\ 
iv  23  10b  (turayd  u),  vii  68  4a  (devayd  u),  88  2c  (adhipd  w),  x  65  lOd 
(dhanasdu).  Also  the  neut.  nom.  sing,  in  bhd  u  i  46  10a  and  the  gen. 
fem.  sing,  in  dnumatyd  u  *x  167  3b. 

The  forms  given  above  are  more  common  in  the  popular  Rigveda 
than  elsewhere. 

The  reading  -sitdsa  u  jicvah,  in  i  140  4b,  requires  some  similar 
explanation,  but  as  the  vowel  is  long  in  this  case  the  analogy  is  not 
exact,  and  u  may  very  well  belong  to  the  word  following.  So  u  jananta 
ii  18  2c. 

172.  The  quantity  of  final  -a  before  hiatus,  and  of  final  -»  -u 
with  hiatus  before  similar  vowels,  is  generally  optional :  but  the 
dual  forms  usually  retain  long  quantity. 

Examples  are : 

asvayd  utd  rathayd  viii  46  10b 

vdpurbhir  d  carata  anyd-anyd         i  62  8d. 

If  we  take  into  account  only  the  instances  in  which  -a  with  hiatus 
is  certainly  to  be  restored,  it  will  be  seen  from  the  list  below  that  the 
short  value  on  the  whole  predominates,  but  not  to  such  extent  as  to 
justify  the  rule  vocalis  ante  vocalem  corripitur.  In  particular,  there 
are  numerous  occurrences  in  the  eighth  place,  and  the  number  of 
occurrences  before  early  and  late  caesura  is  equal.  If  further  we 
include  those  cases  in  which  the  final  -o  of  the  text  represents  a  slight 
phonetic  variation  of  long  final  -a,  as  explained  in  the  last  section,  the 
proportion  of  instances  with  the  full  quantity  will  be  greatly  increased. 

It  may  however  be  noticed  that  the  short  value  very  much' 
predominates  in  the  nom.  sing,  of  nouns  in  -ar. 

Instances  of  final  -I  before  a  similar  vowel  are  so  rare  and  so 
indecisive  that  the  rule  affecting  them  can  only  be  inferred  from  the 


Final  -a,  -I,  -u  before  hiatus  135 

analogy  of  final  -a.  For  -u  we  have  only  the  restored  phrase  n4  u 
(§  124):  and  as  w&amp;  is  then  always  initial,  the  quantity  cannot  be 
determined.  In  internal  combination  we  find  su-uktd  and  other  words, 
always  with  -u. 

(i)     The  following  are  probable  instances  of  -a  with  hiatus  : 

A.  3t,  ii  19  3d,  x  61  9c:  3d,  viii  46  10b:  6,  viii  17  lb, 
34  lib:  8,  i  48  7c  16c,  87  4c,  185  4a,  ii  17  lb,  iv  16  la,  v  29  15b, 
vi  20  8d,  24  9a,  vii  1  7a,  40  4b.  B.     2t,  v  45  2d,  vi  23  4a2,  *75 

3d,  viii  101  13c,  x  30  2b,  *129  5d:  2d,  v  53  14b,  x  26  Id  9b: 
2T,  6  times:  4A,  48  times:  7A,  ii  13  10a,  iv  2  18b,  19  6c, 
vi  4  4b,  viii  103  13a,  x  61   18c,  *101  3b,  132  4d.  C.     Initial, 

15  times  :  2D,  8  times  :  4,  5  times  :  5B,  48  times  :  3TD,  17 
times  :  also  vi  16  27a  (6  in  Troch.  Gayatrl).  D.     5 A,  i  189  4d  : 

6A,  i  60  4b2,  104  5a,  186  6a2,  iv  33  10a1,  vii  69  3a1,  x  49  10b2,  65  15b1. 
E.  5,  i  133  6c,  iii  13  lb,  iv  52  2a,  *v  51  15c,  viii  20  17c,  46  29b,  70 
12d,  x  105  lib  lie:  7a,  i  120  6b:  9,  i  62  8d,  69  9a,  77  la, 
104  lc,  133  6b,  140  13c,  173  4a,  iv  3  13b,  16  la,  v  41  16b  16c,  vi  21 
8d,  24  5d2,  vii  34  4a,  40  3d2,  viii  1  16c,  70  12c,  96  9d,  x  5  |5d  (reading 
ptisa  dsya),  61  14d2. 

1  caesura  after  third  syllable.  2  nom.  sing,  of  noun  in  -ar. 

(ii)  In  the  following  cases  the  text  has  -o  representing  -a  before 
hiatus  (§  171  iii  iv) ;  dtho  i  28  6c  (2D),  113  13b  (2T),  *19l  2c  (2D), 
ix  39  5b  (2D),  x  *27  9d  (2t),  *60  8e  =  *9e  =  *10d  (2D),  *85  35b  (2d), 
*96  13b  (2t),  *137  4b  (2T)  j  aryamo  i  167  8b  (7A) ;  eso  i  46  la  (2d)  ; 
dvisto  vii  34  12a  (3T) ;  imo  vii  1  18a  (2T) ;  cattb  *x  155  2a  (2d);  mo 
*i  50  13d  (in.),  v  65  6d  (in.),  *x  18  13b  (8);  rdkso  i  174  3c  (2T);  vrso 
iii  27  14a  (2D),  viii  33  lOd  (2D). 

(iii)     Instances  of   hiatus  of   -i  before  similar  vowels  are  found 
vii  28  3a  (5B),  *ix  5  8b  (4),  *x  88  4c  (4A). 
For  the  dual  forms  see  §  174. 

173.  The  vowels  -€,  -u  are  regularly  shortened  when  followed 
by  dissimilar  vowels,  but  there  are  many  exceptions.  In  particular, 
duals  regularly,  and  the  particle  u  most  commonly,  retain  the  long 
quantity. 

The  diphthongs  -e  -o  become  short  syllables  when  followed  by 
any  vowel,  except  that  duals  in  -e,  adverbs  etc.  in  -o,  and  the 
locative  tue  tve  regularly  retain  the  long  quantity. 

The  diphthongs  -ai  -au  are  regularly  represented  by  long 
vowels  when  followed  by  any  vowel. 

In  all  these  cases  there  is  authority  even  in  the  text  of  the  Rigveda 
for  considering  that  there  is  no  real  hiatus,  but  a  resolution  into  a 
vowel  and  a  semi- vowel,  or  in  the  case  of  -o  for  -ah,  a  retention  of  the 
original  ending  -as.  Thus  in  the  declension  of  dhi  the  text  gives 
dhiyam  for  dhi-am,  and  in  the  vocative  of  -u  stems  -av  for  -o. 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


136  Final  -I,  -u  before  hiatus 

Consequently  the  regular  use  may  be  represented  by  such  restorations 
as  the  following : 

daksindv&amp;d  vdjini  pr&amp;ciy  eti  iii  6  lc 

pibd  tu  somam  gdv-rjlkam  indra  vi  23  7b 

yuvo  rdjdmsi  suydmdsas  dsvdh  i  180  la. 

Exceptions  are  probable  as  follows  : 

(i)  final  -I  is  retained  (a)  in  the  nom.  sing.;  jdnati  i  122  9a  (3t)  ; 
prthivi  i  94  16d  (8),  iii  8  8b  (7A),  vii  5  4a  (8),  *x  10  5d  (8);  vdji  x  56 
3a  (2t)  :  (b)  in  the  instrum.  sing. ;  uti  vi  29  6b  (2t),  viii  21  7b  (2t), 
susdml  *x  28  12a  (8):  (c)  in  the  imperative  in  -hi:  ihl  i  80  3a  (2d), 
jahl  i  36  16a  (8),  pdhi  viii  60  9b  (2d),  mimihi  vii  19  lie  (8),  snathihl 
vii  25  2a  (8) ;  in  -dhi,  yuyodhl  i  189  3a  (8). 

(ii)  final  -I  of  a  noun-stem  is  regularly  retained  in  the  gen.  loc. 
dual  rodasiyoh,  which  is  always  found  in  Tristubh  cadence :  and  a 
suffix  -lya  is  probable  in  yavlyd  i  167  4a  (10),  173  12c  (10).  Other 
instances  are  very  uncertain,  such  as  prthivlydm  i  139  lib,  x  73  9c, 
and  yajtianiyarn,  etc.,  *x  88  17b,  *107  6b  (all  3t).  The  text  reads 
devdvyam  in  six  passages  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse,  and  the 
protraction  of  d  is  probably  correct,  as  prativiam  regularly  occurs  in 
dimeter  cadence. 

(iii)  The  rule  for  forms  in  -u  depends  largely  upon  analogy,  since 
the  only  forms  that  occur  rather  favour  the  long  quantity,  namely  trsd 
i  58  2b  (2t),  sddhd  (§  160  i)  ii  3  6a  (2d),  and  tanii  *x  183  2b  (4A). 
The  forms  tu  nu  su  are  frequently  found  before  hiatus,  as  tu  iii  30  12d 
(9),  nu  i  100  10b  (9),  vii  96  4a  (5),  su  i  111  2d  (9):  but  in  these  words 
the  short  forms  are  also  found  before  consonants.  On  the  other  hand 
the  restorations  proposed  in  this  chapter  frequently  require  that  nu 
and  sd  should  retain  their  long  quantity  even  before  vowels,  namely 
nd  *iv  18  4c1,  vi  47  lc2,  viii  3  13c1,  72  6a2  18a2,  94  6a2  (all  3t  or  3d); 
sd  ix  65  5c2  (3d),  *x  59  3a3  (3t).     So  also  td  vii  31  4c  (3d)4. 

1  §  175  ii.  -  §  171  iv.  3  §  167  iii.  4  §  162  iv. 

(iv)  In  the  case  of  u  u  the  long  vowel  is  most  favoured  before 
hiatus,  though  both  forms  are  common  :  instances  in  decisive  positions 
are :  u  ii  24  6d  (3t),  iii  5  2a  (3t),  vi  71  5a  (2t),  vii  81  la  (2d),  viii  15 
la  (2d),  x  *86  2c  (2d),  *88  10c  (2t):  u  (chiefly  in  the  popular  Rigveda) 
*v  30  15d  (6A),  vi  27  la  (7B),  x  *27  7a  (7B),  *102  10b  (6B),  *149  3d 
(6B). 

(v)  The  locative  tue,  tve  always  retains  the  long  vowel  before 
hiatus,  as  in  ii  5  8c  (6) :  whereas  asme  is  always  shortened,  as  in 
viii  22  16c  (9),  and  yusme  presumably  has  the  same  value.  Vocatives 
in  -o  are  shortened,  as  indav  ix  40  4b;  for  other  words  in  -o  see  §  171. 
For  the  duals  see  the  next  section. 

(vi)  Final  -ai,  -au  seem  regularly  to  become  -d  before  a  following 
vowel,  as  in  classical  Sanskrit.  There  is  however  in  the  Rigveda  a 
marked  distinction  between  the  group  asmai,  tdsmai,  ydsmai  and  such 
words  as  asau,  v-oi,  and  the  ending  -tavai.  The  former  are  perhaps 
occasionally  shortened,  as  ydsma  v  7  8a  (5),  tdsma  *i  161   12d  (7a), 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Duals  before  hiatus  137 

asma  v  64  2b  (5) :  whereas  the  latter  develope  into  -a  u,  as  shewn  in 
§  171  v.     asau  appears  as  as&amp;v  x  132  4a. 

174.  All  duals,  both  of  nouns  and  verbs,  are  regularly  long 
before  hiatus :  but  to  this  rule  there  are  many  exceptions  in  the 
earlier  parts  of  the  Rigveda. 

Examples  of  the  regular  usage  are  : 
jrayasdnti  dram  prthu 

(text  jrayasdndv)  v  66  5c 

patho  nd  pdyum  jdnasl  ubhe  dnu  ii  2  4d 

td  hi  k§atrdm  dhdrdyethe  dnu  dyun  vi  67  6  a. 

(i)  Exceptions  are  relatively  few,  but  still  certain,  namely  : 

(a)  -a  before  hiatus:  i  184  lc  (9),  iv  15  9a  (5)  10a(5),  v  74  la 
(5),  86  5b  (5)  5d  (5),  vi  63  la  (9),  67  8c  (9),  vii  65  2a  (9),  viii  5  31b 
(5),  25  4b  (5),  26  7c  (7a),  35  24b  (5),  x  *90  lid  (5),  132  lc  (5),  143 
3a  (5).  For  the  text  see  §  171  i. 

(b)  -i :  vi  60  13a  (7B),  *x  94  9a  (6 A). 

(c)  -u :  i  46  13c  (5),  ii  27  15d  (9),  v  43  4a  (9). 

(d)  dual  of  a  noun  in  -e :  ubhd  (ubhe)  v  30  9c  (7B). 

(e)  duals  of  verbs  in  -e :  vii  93  6c  (9),  viii  26  13c  (9),  29  9a  (7a). 
In  the  dvandva  compound  indrd-agni,  -a  is  found  wherever  hiatus 

occurs :  cf.  §  166  i. 

(ii)  It  will  here  be  convenient  to  deal  with  the  question  of 
possible  duals  in  -a,  -i,  -u  before  consonants.  Occurrences  in  the  first 
part  of  a  dvandva  compound  have  been  dealt  with  in  §  166  i.  In  the 
following  instances  the  text  has  -a,  but  the  metre  favours  or  at  least 
permits  the  restoration  of  -a :  i  15  6a  (fin.),  151  4a  (7A),  v  64  6a  (fin.), 
66  6b  (2d),  vi  68  5b  (7 A),  vii  60  12a  (4A.),  61  la  (7A),  85  4b  (4A), 
viii  9  6b  (4).  Similarly  the  restoration  of  -I  is  favoured  by  the  metre 
for  prthivi  in  ii  31  5c  and  iii  54  4d  (both  7A):  and  that  of  -u  is 
admissible  in  vii  19  4d,  65  Id  (both  final).  In  four  instances  in  i  17, 
namely  3b  7a  8a  9b,  a  dimeter  verse  begins  with  indravaruna,  and  the 
restoration  of  indra  vdruna  on  the  analogy  of  varuna  mitra  in  i  122  7a 
is  not  improbable  :  similarly  mitra  vdruna  may  be  restored  in  i  15  6b. 
Besides  we  have  only  deva  v  67  la  (5),  vlra  vi  63  10c  (7B)  and  hotara 
v  5  7b  (5),  sdvistha  vi  68  2b  (7a),  mamhistha  vi  68  2c  (7a),  vipanyu 
viii  8  19c  (5)  are  favoured  by  the  metre;  but  these  seem  insufficient 
as  evidence  of  a  fresh  variation  in  so  common  a  form.  It  seems 
therefore  more  than  doubtful  whether  a  dual  form  in  -a  exists  before 
consonants  :  if  so,  it  is  of  the  vocative  case  only. 

175.  It  appears  from  the  whole  course  of  the  discussions  in 
this  chapter  that  the  Sarhhita  text  stands  in  need  of  substantial 
revision,  not  only  in  questions  of  external  and  internal  Sandhi,  but 
also  in  questions  of  quantity.  It  follows  that  isolated  quantitative 
readings  of  the  text,  contrary  to  its  general  practice  and  the 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


138  Irregularities  of  the  text 

general  tenour  of  the  metrical  evidence,  must  always  be  received 
with  considerable  hesitation :  and  for  the  purposes  of  metrical 
investigation  it  seems  safer  to  assume  in  such  cases  that  the 
words  and  endings  have  their  ordinary  value. 

In  the  case  of  final  vowels  before  hiatus,  the  text  follows  mechanical 
rules  and  entirely  disregards  the  metre;  so  that  in  this  point  the 
Samhita  revision  is  precisely  of  the  same  character  as  in  questions  of 
Sandhi,  and  all  modern  criticism  is  agreed  in  requiring  restoration. 
In  the  case  of  the  variant  final  quantities,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Samhita  is  guided  partly  by  considerations  of  grammar,  that  is  to  say, 
by  the  recognized  value  of  the  endings  in  the  editor's  own  time,  and 
partly  by  the  metre,  so  far  as  he  was  able  to  appreciate  it.  This  work 
is  therefore  executed  in  a  more  intelligent  spirit,  and  probably  at  an 
earlier  date,  than  the  Sandhi  revision  :  but  the  more  exact  methods  of 
modern  literary  criticism  make  it  possible  in  the  majority  of  forms  to 
establish  independently  rules  which  are  more  uniform  and  at  the  same 
time  more  in  harmony  with  the  general  character  of  the  metre. 
Lastly  in  the  case  of  final  -o  we  can  recognize  in  some  words  such  as 
dtho  a  state  of  the  text  so  early  that  it  recognizes  the  historical 
differences  between  various  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  and  in  others  like 
ut6  a  restoration  on  purely  metrical  grounds,  which  produces  an 
artificial  regularity  of  metre  going  greatly  beyond  the  regular  practice 
of  the  bards. 

That  the  text  of  the  Rigveda  should  have  been  corrected  by 
successive  editors,  and  from  different  points  of  view,  is  in  itself 
sufficiently  probable  :  and  under  such  circumstances  no  restoration 
of  the  original  text  can  claim  to  be  more  than  approximative.  But 
whatever  difficulties  are  involved,  it  is  at  least  safe  to  say  that  it  is 
better  to  face  them  than  to  treat  as  a  text  affording  a  basis  for 
metrical  investigation  one  that  is  so  full  of  inconsistencies  as  the 
Samhita.  We  constantly  find  in  hymns  belonging  to  the  same  group, 
and  even  in  the  same  hymn  and  the  same  verse,  differences  of  quantity 
for  which  no  metrical  or  other  cause  can  easily  be  imagined,  and  which 
it  is  therefore  impossible  to  ascribe  to  the  author.  Such  inconsistencies 
are  illustrated  in  the  passages  quoted  below  in  pairs,  the  number  of 
which  might  be  indefinitely  increased : 

(yend  prthivydm  ni  krivim  sdyadhyai  ii  17  6c 

\yena  jdnd  ubhdye  bhunjate  visah  ii  24  lOd 

(krdhi  no  ray  a  usijo  yavistha  iii  15  3d 

\krdhi  rdtnam  susanitar  dhdnandm  iii  18  5a 

(avis  karta  mahitvand  i  86  9b 

\jyotis  karta  ydd  usmdsi  i  86  10c 

{pibd  somam  mahatd  indriydya  x  116  la 

piba  rdye  sdvase  huydmdnah  x  1 1 6  1  c. 

The  extent  to  which  correction  is  required  in  each  class  of  forms  is 
discussed  in  the  next  section. 

An  isolated  variation  in  the  text  may  in  some  cases  be  a  trace  of 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


The  Samhitd  text  139 

an  earlier  recension,  and  may  serve  as  a  valuable  confirmation  of  the 
indications  of  metre.  But  if  it  only  has  the  effect  of  removing  an 
occasional  metrical  irregularity,  the  most  probable  explanation  is  that 
it  is  due  to  excessive  regard  for  the  metre.  In  all  the  instances  that 
follow  the  text  gives  long  quantity  to  syllables  which  have  ordinarily 
the  short  vowel,  and  which  appear  so  rarely  in  positions  that  favour 
long  syllables  that  there  seems  no  reason  to  look  for  any  other 
explanation  than  the  usual  metrical  liberty  of  the  Rigveda. 

The  occurrences  are  as  follows  : 

(i)  in  flexional  endings  :  -d  nom.  s.  masc.  ;  sd  i  145  lb  (8),  vi  17 
9a  (8):  -a  vocative;  i  61  16a  (8),  viii  45  22a  (6)  38a  (6) :  -asya 
genitive ;  *i  162  19a  (8),  vii  79  4c  (8) :  -esu  loc.  pi. ;  viii  31  9d  (3D) : 
-ti  3  sing.  ;  rdksatl  risdh  ii  26  4c  (10)  on  the  analogy  of  rdksata  risdh  ii 
34  9b,  but  see  §  167  iv :  -ta  3  sing. ;  ii  33  13c  (8),  *vii  33  2d  (8), 
viii  19  24a  (8),  x  25  7d  (final  syllable  misunderstood  for  8) :  -ta  3  pi. 
iv  5  5d  (8),  34  Id  (8).  A  slight  doubt  exists  as  to  the  neut.  sing,  in  -d 
from  stems  in  -an,  -man,  -van.  The  form  bhiimd  is  found  in  i  61  14b 
(5C),  62  8a  (8),  173  6c  (fin.)  and  appears  to  be  a  quasi-dual  on  the 
analogy  of  the  preceding  dydvd  :  other  forms  are  found  in  the  text  in 
i  69  3b  (8),  iv  2  16d  (2T),  vii  28  la  (2t),  x  45  4b  (2D),  *129  lb  (8), 
*142  2a  (8),  176  lc  (2D);  whilst  ndmd  is  favoured  by  the  metre  in 
i  48  4d  (2d),  and  brdhmd  vii  24  4b  (2t).     Cf.  §  166  v. 

(ii)  in  particles:  dva  ;  vi  46  lib  (6)  :  ihd;  iv  5  14c  (8),  31 
11a  (4),  x  178  Id  (8):  ca;  i  77  2d  (2T),  iii  57  5d  (8),  viii  53  4a  (10 : 
the  text  has  ca,  i.e.  ca  d) :  cand;  i  84  20b  (6):  nd;  i  147  3d 
(8)  =  iv  4  13d  (the  Sariihita  has  ndha,  Pp.  nd  aha,  TS.  correctly  nd  ha), 
*vii  104  13a  (init.),  *x  34  8c  (8) :  prd-pra ;  i  129  8a  (2t)  :  ha;  iv 
31  5b  (2d),  v  41  7d  (2t).  The  text  also  has  three  times  nahi  nu,  and 
twice  nahi  nd  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse  :  nahi  nd  is  probably  the 
correct  reading  throughout,  namely  in  i  80  15a,  167  9a,  vi  27  3a 
before  consonants,  and  in  *iv  18  4c,  viii  3  13c  before  vowels  (§173  iii). 
There  are  also  occasional  instances  in  compounds,  as  ista-purtd  *x 
14  8b. 

176.  In  spite  of  numerous  errors  in  detail,  it  remains  the  fact 
that  the  Sarhhita  text  on  the  whole  gives  a  true  picture  of  the 
quantities  even  of  the  variant  final  vowels.  Further,  the  bias  it 
shews  is  readily  explained  by  the  examination  of  its  usage  in  each 
class  of  words.  For  the  long  final  vowels  enumerated  in  §  158  the 
text  only  occasionally  gives  short  quantity,  and  that  chiefly  at  the 
end  of  the  verse  or  distich,  or  before  consonant-groups.  In  the 
case  of  the  verbal  endings  in  -d,  -ihd,  -ta,  for  which  the  poets 
preferred  the  long  values,  the  text  prefers  the  short  values,  which 
were  no  doubt  established  in  the  later  period :  and  the  short 
values  are  therefore  introduced  wherever  the  metre  is  favourable 
or  indifTerent.  Similarly  for  a,  tu,  nu  and  su  the  text  prefers  the 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


140  Samhitd  rides  of  quantity 

short  values  except  in  certain  phrases.  In  the  case  of  adyd  and 
ddha  the  text  appears  to  be  in  general  agreement  with  the  metre. 
In  the  words  that  are  usually  short  the  text  only  introduces  the 
long  vowel  in  the  'positions  of  protraction,'  and  there  very  ir- 
regularly. 

The  practice  of  the  text  has  been  elaborately  investigated  by 
Th.  Benfey  (Die  Quantitatsverschiedenheiten,  Gottingen  1874 — 1880) 
and  J.  Zubaty  (Der  Quantitdtswechsel,  Vienna  Oriental  Journal, 
1888 — 1891).  Only  a  very  short  summary  of  the  results  can  be 
given  here :  in  many  cases  more  detailed  information  is  given  above. 
The  chief  practical  importance  of  establishing  the  rules  of  the  text  (so 
far  as  it  is  possible)  lies  in  the  presumption  that  some  of  the  exceptions 
represent  an  earlier  recension. 

(i)  In  the  forms  noted  in  §  158  the  text  usually  gives  the  long 
vowel  correctly,  except  before  consonant-groups  and  at  the  end  of  the 
distich.  The  treatment  of  separate  words  differs  slightly.  Thus  end, 
end  always  have  the  long  vowel,  and  purudhd,  visvdhd  are  only 
shortened  before  consonant-groups ;  whilst  instrumental  in  -t%  are 
long  before  groups,  but  occasionally  shortened  when  final.  The  perfect 
forms  have  the  short  vowel  at  the  end  of  all  verses,  as  have  also  dthd 
and  evd.  In  the  positions  3T,  3D  the  text  usually  gives  the  long 
vowel  correctly,  but  aorists  in  -svd  are  short,  and  sometimes  evd  and 
smd.  Before  the  caesura  the  perfect  forms  and  evd  have  the  short 
vowel,  but  smd  is  given  correctly:  the  aorists  in  svd  are  also  short,  not 
only  before  the  caesura,  but  also  often  in  the  positions  2T,  2D.  In 
several  positions  the  text  gives  gerunds  in  -tyd,  -yd,  but  -dya,  though 
all  are  treated  by  the  poets  in  the  same  way. 

(ii)  In  the  very  numerous  occurrences  of  the  verb-forms  in  -d,  -thd, 
-td  the  text  gives  the  long  vowel  correctly  in  the  positions  of  Group  A, 
in  2t,  2d,  often  in  2T  and  2D,  and  sometimes  in  7A.  Otherwise  it 
gives  the  short  vowel,  which  should  certainly  be  corrected  in  the  very 
common  position  4A,  and  probably  also  in  3TD,  4,  5B,  and  in  final 
syllables.  The  neuter  plurals  are  treated  in  the  same  way  and  need 
the  same  correction. 

(iii)  In  the  adverbs  u,  tu,  nit,  sfi  the  text  shews  a  strong  bias  for 
the  short  vowel.  In  the  positions  6,  8,  10  the  long  vowel  is  used 
correctly,  but  in  the  positions  3t,  3d  (where  a  long  vowel  is  urgently 
needed)  the  text  gives  the  short  vowel,  and  for  nu  and  sti  either 
lengthens  arbitrarily  a  preceding  vowel  or  substitutes  a  form  in  -o. 
In  the  positions  2t,  2d  a  long  vowel  is  occasionally  given  :  otherwise 
almost  always  the  short  vowel.  But  the  apparently  arbitrary  exceptions 
nu  (initial),  nu  cit,  u  nu,  and  u  su  are  evidence  of  an  earlier  and  more 
correct  recension. 

(iv)  In  the  adverbs  ddha,  adyd,  and  yddl  the  long  vowel  is  more 
freely  recognized.  It  appears  fairly  regularly,  not  only  in  the  positions 
2t  and  2d,  but  also  in  2T,  2D,  and  less  regularly  in  4.  On  the  other 
hand  ddha  ydd  appears  always,  without  regard  to  metre. 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Quantity  by  position  141 

(v)  Of  the  imperatives  in  -dhi,  -hi  the  text  gives  srnuhf,  vrudhi, 
krdhi  correctly,  but  in  the  positions  2t,  2d  otherwise  inclines  to  the 
short  vowel.  In  all  positions  other  words  have  the  short  vowel,  and, 
as  it  appears,  correctly. 

(vi)  Vowels  capable  of  protraction  are  written  as  long  in  the 
eighth  place,  perhaps  correctly  :  the  adverbs  in  -tra  regularly  so  in  the 
positions  2t,  2d,  often  in  the  positions  2T,  2D,  but  not  elsewhere. 
The  pronouns  yena,  kena,  tenet  have  the  long  vowel  in  about  half  the 
occurrences  in  the  positions  2t,  2d,  and  occasionally  in  the  position  2D. 

The  practice  of  the  text  gives  us  some  insight  into  the  editor's 
appreciation  of  the  metre.  The  comparatively  strict  rules  for  short 
quantity  in  the  positions  of  Group  E  he  thoroughly  understands :  but 
the  importance  of  the  positions  3t,  3d,  5b  entirely  escapes  him.  Of  the 
less  strict  preferences  of  Group  B  he  exaggerates  the  importance  of  the 
long  vowel  in  the  positions  2t  and  2d,  and  still  more  in  2T  and  2D  : 
whilst  on  the  other  hand  he  is  unaware  that  the  long  vowel  is  preferable 
in  the  positions  4A,  4B,  4b,  and  7A.  It  is  not  clear  what  view  he 
takes  of  the  position  4,  nor  whether  he  thinks  that  the  positions  before 
the  caesura  and  at  the  end  of  the  verse  are  preferably  short  or  only 
indifferent.  In  the  positions  3T  and  3D  he  prefers  the  short  vowel, 
but  not  to  such  an  extent  as  to  fail  to  give  the  true  value  to  most  of 
the  vowels  of  §  158.  Before  a  consonant-group  a  short  vowel  is  almost 
invariably  given  :  whether  correctly  or  not,  is  a  question  which  does 
not  directly  concern  the  metre.  Generally,  the  editor  shews  exactly 
that  knowledge  of  the  metre  which  might  be  expected  of  a  man 
thoroughly  familiar  with  the  text,  who  had  yet  never  made  an  exact 
study  of  its  mechanism,  nor  distinctly  formulated  his  own  principles  of 
revision. 

Occasionally  we  can  recognize  mistakes  by  the  editor  in  the 
application  of  his  own  principles,  as  when  in  viii  12  17c,  13  7c  he 
fails  to  recognize  the  Dimeter  Usnih  metre,  or  when  he  applies  the 
rule  for  consonant-groups  before  tudrn  x  61  22a,  and  tu&amp;van  i  30  14a, 
189  6a.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  regard  the  authority  of  the  text 
as  final. 

177.  In  questions  not  connected  with  final  syllables  few 
difficulties  arise.  It  must  be  noticed  that  syllables  are  long  by 
position  if  the  vowel  is  followed  either  (i)  by  ch  (cch) ;  (ii)  by  Ih ; 
or  (iii)  by  -nn  in  the  third  person  plural  of  secondary  tenses  and 
in  the  nominative  singular  of  participles,  but  rarely  elsewhere. 
The  sounds  represented  by  m  m  h  also  contribute  to  make  length 
by  position. 

The  following  are  examples  : 

diaur  dsld  utd  cchadih  *x  85  10b 

ndrdyaso  rid  jdlhavah  viii  61  lib 

ud  abhrdniva  standyann  iyarti  vi  44  12a 

sbraam  srinanti  matibhih  suarvidam  ix  84  5b 

visvarii  drljidm  bhayata  djman  d  te  vi  31  2d 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


142  Textual  corrections 

(i)  The  most  important  word  containing  ch  is  dclid,  which  in  all 
cases  has  the  metrical  value  of  dcchd ;  and  similarly  we  find  always 
gaccha-,  prccha-,  yaccha-,  dcchidra.  This  evidence  outweighs  the  few 
instances  in  which  ch  appears  to  have  the  value  of  a  single  consonant, 
namely  uch&amp;t  i  48  3a  (5),  cachadyat  x  73  9b  (9),  sahdchandas  *x  130 
7a  (6 A),  suchadistama  vii  66  13c  (6B).  The  value  cch  is  correctly 
given  in  the  devandyarl  text  wherever  the  sound  occurs  medially,  and 
the  writing  ch  may  therefore  be  regarded. as  an  error  of  transliteration: 
it  is  however  convenient  from  the  point  of  view  of  etymology. 

(ii)  Ih  is  rare  in  the  Rigveda,  except  in  the  participles  drljid, 
tr[hd,  in  which  the  restorations  dflhd,  tj'lhd  have  been  proposed  on 
historical  grounds.  So  far  as  the  metre  is  concerned,  these  restorations 
are  unnecessary,  Ih  being  always  treated  in  Sanskrit  alphabets  as  a 
double  consonant. 

(iii)  Amongst  forms  in  which  -nn  represents  a  double  consonant 
are  to  be  reckoned  aorists  like  dtann  vi  61  9c  (2d)  :  the  nominative 
singular  in  -nil  as  sadfhh  has  the  same  value,  for  instance  in  i  94  7a 
(10).  Locatives  such  as  djman,  tdsmin  must  everywhere  be  restored 
for  -ann,  -inn  of  the  text,  and  vocatives  in  -an,  -in  usually  for  those  in 
-ann,  -inn :  but  the  final  syllable  of  magliavann  is  always  long  by 
position,  and  pusann,  rdjann,  vfsann  and  sahasdvann  usually,  for 
instance  in  ii  28  9b  (4A),  iii  32  lc  (8),  vii  4  6c  (8). 

(iv)  In  such  common  sounds  as  ih,  m,  h  a  large  number  of 
instances  would  be  required  to  throw  doubt  upon  the  ordinary  rule 
for  position.  Such  instances  are  only  found  in  the  datives  mdhyam, 
tubhyam,  asmdbhyam,  for  which  forms  without  the  final  -m  are  not 
uncommon  in  the  text,  and  must  also  be  restored  as  shewn  above  on 
p.  30.  This  restoration  is  not  required  in  *i  50  13a  or  *126  6c,  where 
the  syllable  occurs  in  the  semicadence  of  epic  Anustubh. 

178.     There  are  very  few  irregularities  in  the  Samhita  text 

which  affect  individual  words,  and   such   as  occur  are  of  little 

historical  importance. 

The  following  list  indicates  the  readings  chosen  for  the  purposes  of 
this  book  as  most  probable  : 

dyuh:  a  neuter  form  dyu  must  be  restored  in  i  37  15c  (5),  44  6c 
(9),  89  "9d  (9),  116  10c  (9),  iii  49  2d  (9),  62  15a  (5),  viii  18  18b  (5), 
x  144  5c  (9)  6c  (9).      Cf,  the  compounds  ayu-sdk,  etc. 

im :  i  is  to  be  restored  occasionally  in  the  popular  Rigveda  :  *i  164 
7a  (7B)  *16c  (7B),  *x  27  lid  (7B),  *125  4b  (6A). 

isdna:  isdna  is  metrically  preferable  in  i  61  15b  (9),  iv  16  lib  (9), 
and  in  isdnakft  viii  52  5b  (5),  65  5b  (5),  90  2b  (5). 

urviyti:  this  form  usually  follows  the  caesura,  and  uruya  is  an 
attractive  correction,  which  has  been  suggested  on  the  analogy  of 
sddhuyd  and  other  words.  The  metrical  conditions  do  not  allow  us  to 
trace  this  proposed  form  with  certainty,  since  urviyti  is  everywhere 
admissible  :  the  form  in  the  text  is  required  in  x  92  12a  (8). 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


Textual  correct  ions  143 

uruvydc:  for  uruvydncam  we  must  restore  urusincam  in  v  1  12d 
(7B) ;  cf.  jvisitanca  §  166  iv. 

ksdya:  for  ksdyasya  vi  71  6c  (6 A)  ksayasi  is  well  suggested  by 
H.   Oldenberg.     Cf.  however  iv  21   8a. 

cardtha  stands  in  the  text  in  i  66  9a  (9),  and  cardtham  is  required 
by  the  metre  in  i  68  lb  (4b),  and  cardtham  i  70  3b  (9)  7b  (4b):  all  the 
passages  need  emendation. 

chardis  is  always  to  be  read  without  r,  for  instance  in  viii  9  lc  (11). 
See  also  §  177. 

ji  'conquer':  the  metre  requires  jigivdrhs  in  ii  12  4c  (6 A),  18  8d 
(6 A),  v  62  9d  (6 A),  vi  19  7d  (6A):  but  jigivdrhs  with  the  text  in  iii 
15  4b  (10)  and  preferably  in  x  78  4b  (2T). 

trtiya:  a  form  tritiya  making  position  is  required  in  i  155  3d  (3t), 
iv  34  4d  (2t),  ix  75  2d  (2t),  x  1  3b  (8). 

tri :  tisfndm  must  be  restored  in  the  single  occurrence  v  69  2c  (10). 

das :  for  dasat  daslt  is  metrically  preferable  in  i  120  15a  (10)  and 
139  5c  (7a):  cf.  vii  1  21d. 

das:  an  alternative  form  das  is  suggested  by  the  metre  in  i  76  Id 
(9),  iv  10  4c  (9),  vii  3  7a  (9),  29  3b  (9),  viii  103  4b  (7). 

ndr,  nf  '  man ' :  in  the  gen.  pi.  nfndm  is  to  be  restored. 

pavltdr  :  pavitdr  must  be  restored,  as  found  in  the  Samaveda  and 
the  Pada-patha,  in  ix  4  4a  (2D),  83  2c  (7B). 

pavakd  :  pavakd  is  everywhere  to  be  restored. 

purusa,  purusa.  Except  in  the  forms  purusdta,  purusatrd,  puru- 
satvdta,  the  metre  always  supports  purusa,  for  instance  i  114  10a  (8), 
*x  27  22b  (8),  *90  6a  (2d). 

barhisdd :  the  reading  in  the  text  is  preferable  in  ii  3  3d  (6A), 
v  44  lb  (6A);  but  barhih-sdd  in  vii  2  6c  (2t),  ix  68  lc  (2t),  *x  15  3c 
(2t)  *4a  (2t). 

brhdnt :  a  form  brhdbhih  is  metrically  preferable  in  iv  56  4a  (6A), 
for  which  cf.  mahdnt  below :  and  the  forms  brhd-diva,  brha-divd, 
brha-divd  are  metrically  preferable  to  those  in  the  text  except  in 
one  passage,  viz.  x  66  8b  (2t). 

bhurisdh  :  read  bhurisdh  ix  88  2a. 

mandin :  mandi  is  to  be  restored  in  ix  58  la  lc  2c  3c  (always  5)  : 
cf.  mandim  i  9  2b,  and  see  below  on  vdjrin. 

mahdnt :  the  dual  mahdna  (or  mahda)  and  plural  mahdtah  (or 
mahddh)  are  suggested  by  the  metre  in  v  41  13a  (6 A),  vi  67  4c  (6A). 
An  instrumental  mahdbhih  stands  in  the  text  in  vii  37  Id  (7B)  and 
must  be  restored  in  iii  36  Id  (6A),  iv  22  3b  (7B),  41  2d  (6A),  vi  32 
4b  (7B). 

mahimdn :  for  mahimnd  we  must  restore  mahind  i  59  7a  (6A  :  see 
also  §  151  i). 

mrl_  *  pity ' :  mfl  is  everywhere  to  be  restored,  as  is  made  clear  in 
particular  by  the  derivative  mfllkd,  which  always  stands  at  the 
beginning  of  the  verse,  and  never  in  Tristubh  cadence.  The  only 
occurrences  unfavourable  to  the  long  quantity  are  iv  3  3b  (6A), 
vi  50  12b  (7a). 

For  index  to  the  symbols  see  p.  148. 


144  History  of  quantitative  change 

yaj :  for  ayeje  read  ayaje  i  114  2c  (9),  x  63  7a  (9)  and  perhaps 
vi  36  2a  (4B). 

ydsmin :  it  is  possible  that  a  locative  form  ydsmi  should  be  restored 
before  consonants  in  i  33  14a  (9),  174  5a  (9),  iii  22  la  (7B),  49  la  (9) 
and  *x  95  4c  (9).     See  on  sdsmin  below. 

vajrin :  a  vocative  form  vajri  is  suggested  by  the  metre  in  i  80  7b 
(5),  viii  99  lb  (5);  see  on  mandin  above. 

virdsdh  i  35  6b  is  supported  by  the  metre,  but  seems  to  require 
emendation  as  regards  the  first  syllable. 

visvddevdn  is  probably  to  be  restored  for  visvdn  devdn  in  viii  10  2c 
(6A);  cf.  *x  125  lb. 

sc  at  the  beginning  of  words  and  in  the  latter  element  of  compounds 
is  to  be  read  as  c,  as  in  camnan  i  104  2c,  and  always  in  ds'va-,  visvd-, 
8U-,  hdri-candra. 

s'vas :  read  perhaps  svdslti  for  svdsiti  in  i  65  9a  (2t). 

san  :  for  sasavdrhs  we  must  restore  sasanvdms  throughout,  as  in 
vii  87  2b  (10).     There  seems  to  be  an  exception  in  iv  42  10a  (6 A). 

sdsmin:  a  locative  form  sdsmi  should  perhaps  be  restored  in  i  174 
4a  (9) ;  see  on  ydsmin  above. 

sdnuni  neut.  pi.  i  155  lc  (3T)  is  quite  consistent  with  the  metre, 
but  hardly  sufficient  evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  form  in  -uni  instead 
of  the  usual  form  in  -uni. 

stavdn.  This  form  occurs  in  the  text  in  ii  19  5b  (10),  20  5c  (10), 
vi  24  8b  (10).  No  such  word  is  known  in  Sanskrit,  and  it  is  also 
strongly  opposed  to  the  metre  :  numerous  emendations  have  conse- 
quently been  proposed.  The  form  sdtvd  satisfies  all  the  conditions 
both  of  meaning  and  of  metre,  and  I  incline  to  restore  this,  not  only 
in  the  passages  named,  but  also  in  iii  18  4a  (10),  in  which  stavdn 
appears  to  have  been  falsely  corrected  to  stutdh, 

han :  for  hanydma  read  lidndma  viii  21  12c  (5 A). 

179.  The  historical  investigation  of  quantitative  change  is 
rendered  difficult  by  the  fact  that  the  metre  only  indicates  the 
quantity  with  any  certainty  in  about  one-third  of  the  occurrences. 
In  these  positions  there  are  about  600  variations  from  the  general 
rules,  shewing  about  the  same  margin  of  choice  which  is  allowed 
in  the  matter  of  hiatus  (§  131).  In  the  majority  of  instances  the 
historical  changes  are  in  the  direction  of  shortening  a  long  final 
vowel :  in  about  one-half  of  these  instances  the  vowel  is  regularly 
long,  but  the  short  vowel  becomes  more  common  in  the  later  part 
of  the  Rigveda :  in  the  remainder  the  vowel  is  regularly  short,  but 
traces  of  the  long  quantity  are  found  in  the  earliest  parts  of  the 
Rigveda.  There  are  however  instances  of  change  in  the  opposite 
direction  :  in  particular,  the  dual  and  locative  forms  before  vowels 
For  index  to  the  symbols  see  page  148. 


History  of  quantitative  change  145 

are  occasionally  short  in  the  earliest  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  but 
later  the  long  value  admits  of  no  exceptions.  So  far  as  these 
changes  are  evidence  of  the  history  of  the  Rigveda  itself,  they 
indicate  that  the  hymns  of  Group  I  are  its  earliest  part. 

In  the  table  (§  180)  long  quantity  is  presumed  for  all  variant 
vowels  in  the  positions  of  Group  A  (§  157),  and  also  in  the  positions 
2t,  2d,  4b  :  and  short  quantity  for  all  vowels  in  the  positions  of 
Group  E,  and  also  in  the  positions  5 A,  6 A,  and  6B. 

(i)     SJwrtening  of  final  long  vowels. 

In  this  direction  considerable  change  can  be  traced  in  the  Vedic 
period,  with  the  assistance  of  the  table  in  the  next  section.  In  the 
forms  of  §  158  we  have  hardly  any  trace  of  the  shortening  in  the 
metre,  and  but  little  more  in  the  text :  but  the  Pada-patha  forms  shew 
that  at  a  later  period  most  of  the  forms  had  short  final  vowels.  In  the 
adverbs  in  -u,  ddhd,  and  yddl,  as  well  as  in  the  verb-forms  in  -d,  -thd, 
and  -td,  we  can  trace  with  certainty  the  same  process  within  the 
Rigveda  itself :  probably  also  in  the  imperatives  in  -dhl,  -hi,  and  in 
compounds  of  puru-,  vasu-.  Whether  such  forms  as  usdsam,  however, 
are  the  oldest  Yedic  forms  of  the  strong  cases  of  usds  is  uncertain  :  in 
any  case  they  do  not  survive  the  period  of  the  Rigveda  proper.  The 
paradox  of  the  existence  side  by  side  of  the  forms  end,  end  but  yena, 
tena  remains  unexplained  :  we  are  not  entitled  to  assert  that  -d  is  the 
older  ending.     The  accent  of  the  adverb  is  probably  of  importance. 

(ii)     Lengthening  of  final  short  vowels. 

Quite  distinctly  the  statistics  shew  that  the  long  final  vowel  in 
adyd,  in  the  verb  forms  in  -md,  -svd  (thematic),  in  the  instrumental 
of  nouns  in  -end,  and  in  the  paroxytone  adverbs  in  -trd  is  (for  the 
Rigveda)  a  comparatively  late  development,  most  common  in  the 
cretic  period,  when  (as  we  shall  see)  the  long  syllable  in  the  8th  place 
at  least  was  most  rigidly  required.  The  occurrences  taken  together 
are,  it  is  true,  less  than  150  in  number:  but  they  are  unmistakeable, 
and  can  most  naturally  be  explained  as  intentional  revivals  of  archaic 
or  supposed  archaic  forms. 

(iii)     Developement  of  final  -a  into  -o,  -a v. 

This  change  is  connected  with  increasing  strictness  in  the  Rigveda 
in  the  question  of  hiatus.  The  oldest  poems  not  only  shew  considerable 
liberty  in  the  choice  between  hiatus  and  combination,  but  also  where 
a  final  long  vowel  stands  before  hiatus  a  further  choice  between  the 
full  value  and  shortening.  But  in  the  greater  part  of  the  Rigveda 
final  -I,  -u  are  regularly  short  before  dissimilar  vowels,  whilst  the  duals 
and  adverbs  in  -a,  if  used  with  hiatus,  retain  the  long  quantity.  In  the 
popular  Rigveda  we  observe  a  series  of  forms  which  formerly  ended  in 
-a,  such  as  the  duals,  dthd  and  md,  regularly  used  before  hiatus  and 
written  in  -o  or  -dv,  the  two  endings  being  metrically  equivalent :  and 
there  are  traces  of  similar  change  in  locatives  of  -i  and  -u  stems,  in  the 
perfects  of  verbs  in  -a.  (as  paprd,  papraH)  and  in  words  ending  in  -ai 

A.  10 


146  Problems  of  comparative  grammar 

and  -au,  which  have  a  syllabic  increase  to  -a  u.  These  changes,  so  far 
as  the  evidence  of  the  Rigveda  goes,  are  of  a  phonetic  character  ■  and 
the  very  different  explanations  given  by  the  writers  on  comparative 
grammar  are  not  easily  reconciled  with  the  facts  as  given  in  detail 
above. 

(iv)     Protraction  of  final  vowels  of  stems. 

The  amount  of  material  available  in  the  Rigveda  is  too  small  and 
not  sufficiently  homogeneous  to  lead  to  historical  conclusions.  Amongst 
final  stem-vowels  perhaps  a  majority  have  historical  justification;  and 
are  therefore  found  in  the  earlier  parts  of  the  Rigveda :  but  phonetic 
lengthening  is  an  increasing  force,  and  is  found  at  work  on  a  still 
larger  scale  in  the  later  history  of  Sanskrit  (J.  Wackernagel,  Altindische 
Grammatik,  §§  41-43). 

To  the  wider  historical  questions  suggested  by  the  changing 
quantities  of  the  Rigveda  only  slight  reference  can  be  made  here : 
a  summary  of  the  widely  differing  views  of  the  writers  on  comparative 
grammar  will  be  found  in  WackernagePs  Altindische  Grammatik  §  266  c. 
Variant  final  vowels  are  found  in  Latin  also  on  a  large  scale,  and  are 
attributed  to  the  shifting  of  the  accent  away  from  the  final  syllable, 
with  consequent  shortening.  According  to  this  view  the  pre-classical 
writers  of  Latin  comedy  shew  the  later  historical  facts,  whereas  the 
classical  writers  almost  everywhere  restore  the  archaic  long  vowels, 
contrary  to  the  ordinary  pronunciation,  for  instance  in  redeo,  dma. 
This  example  serves  to  emphasize  the  technical  and,  to  some  extent, 
arbitrary  character  of  the  sharp  distinction  usually  drawn  by  the  poets 
between  long  and  short  vowels.  When  the  Rigveda  indicates  a  long 
vowel  in  the  neuters  plural  in  -a,  -l,  -u  it  is  perhaps  faithfully  recording 
an  earlier  stage  in  the  language  than  that  indicated  by  the  occasional 
appearance  of  -a,  -i,  -n.  But  that  the  verb-forms  in  -a,  -tJtd,  -td,  -dlil 
are  in  any  absolute  sense  older  than  the  forms  in  -a,  -tha,  -ta,  -dhi  we 
cannot  venture  to  affirm  on  the  authority  of  the  Rigveda  :  it  can  only 
be  said  that  the  oldest  Vedic  writers  most  freely  use  the  long  vowels. 

Many  flexional  endings  employ  forms  with  long  and  short  final 
vowels  side  by  side,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  poets  should  use  as 
regularly  as  they  do  a  perfect  in  -ma  but  past  tenses  in  -ma,  an  aorist 
imperative  in  -svd  but  a  thematic  imperative  in  -svay  an  adverb  end 
but  instrumental  forms  in  -ena.  The  analogy  of  Latin  might  incline 
us  to  think  that  the  long  vowel  is  in  all  cases  the  older  form  :  or  again 
we  might  look  to  the  accent  as  the  original  cause  for  the  discrimination. 
But  even  within  the  Rigveda  the  shif tings  of  quantity  cannot  be 
systematically  connected  either  with  the  position  of  the  accent  or  with 
the  effect  of  neighbouring  heavy  or  light  syllables.  Only  on  a  broad 
view  of  the  whole  evidence  it  may  be  said  that  the  shortening  of  long 
final  vowels  is  a  phonetic  tendency  of  early  Sanskrit,  and  that  the  long 
vowels  of  the  Sariihita  text  are  not  as  a  rule  artificial  protractions 
on  metrical  grounds,  but  imperfect  records  of  an  older  stage  of  the 
language. 


Table  of  quantitative  changes 


147 


180.     History  of  Quantitative  Change  in  the  Rigveda. 


Refer  to  § 

Periods 

Arch. 

Stroph. 

Normal 

(Jretic 

I'op. 

Units  of  bulk 

19 

•9 

1-8 

11 

•9 

All  decreasing  variations 

422 1 

199 

73 

93 

34 

23 

All  increasing  variations 

365 

71 

37 

74 

70 

113 

Eatio 

26 

34 

45 

67 

84 

Decreasing  Variations: 

160 

tu 

17 

l2 

2 

5 

4 

0 

&gt;» 

ml  (with  nil  cit) 

35 

11 

1 

5 

3 

1 

&gt;&gt; 

u 

51 

14 

9 

5 

5 

3 

su 

38 

9 

4 

6 

2 

3 

161 

ddha 

45 

11 

10 

3 

4 

7 

»j 

yddi 

14 

4 

0 

3 

0 

2 

162 

Imperative  in  -uhi,  -hi,  -dhl 

36 

9 

9 

3 

1 

4 

166 

Compounds  in  purii.-,  vasu- 

39 

11 

14 

2 

1 

0 

170  i 

Duals  in  -athe,  -ate,  etc. 

28 

7 

11 

3 

0 

1 

„    Ha 

usasam,  etc. 

24 

2 

7 

4 

6 

0 

„    tie 

Forms  in  -manam,  -vanam,  -saham 

14 

5 

2 

1 

0 

0 

„    He 

Locatives  in  -av 

18 

1 

2 

6 

4 

0 

172 

-a  short  before  hiatus 

38 

13 

4 

3 

3 

1 

174 

Duals  short  before  hiatus 

25 

8 

4 

2 

0 

2 

Increasing  Variations: 

158 

Gerunds  in  -tya,  -ya 

4 

0 

0 

1 

0 

3 

159 

Imperative  in  -a 

41 

2 

8 

4 

7 

16 

2  pers.  pi.  in  -tha,  -ta 

43 

8 

7 

4 

2 

13 

160 

u 

61 

5 

6 

7 

10 

24 

161 

yddi 

14 

1 

1 

1 

0 

9 

161 

adyd 

21 

1-5 

1 

3 

7 

3 

163  i 

1  pers.  pi.  in  -ma 

30 

4-5 

3 

3 

9 

2 

ii    ii 

Perfect  in  -tha,  -a 

25 

3 

2 

3 

8 

3 

n    Hi 

Imperative  in  -svd  (thematic) 

10 

2 

0 

1-5 

5 

0 

m    iv 

Instrumental  in  -end 

25 

1*5, 

1 

4 

5 

7 

ii    v 

Adverbs  in  -trd 

37 

3 

2 

4 

6 

16 

171  v 

a  u  for  -at,  -au,  -ah  3 

32 

3 

6 

3 

2 

16 

172  ii 

-o  for  -a  before  vowel 3 

22 

1-5 

4 

1 

2 

12 

163  vi 

yena,  Una,  etc.,  protracted 

37 

7 

7 

4 

2 

8 

„    vii 

Protraction  in  compounds 

56 

10 

10 

7 

10 

4 

1  This  column  shews  the  absolute  number  of  variations. 

2  From  this  point  the  figures  shew  the  proportional  number  of  variations  for  5000 
trimeter  verses. 

3  In  any  part  of  the  verse. 


10—2 


148 


Table  of  symbols 


181.    Tabular  explanation  of  the  symbols  corresponding 
to  the  various  positions  in  the  verse. 


Symbols 

Position 

Quantity 

Trim.  v. 

Dim.  v. 

Regular 

Preferable 

In. 

In. 

Initial  syllable. 

[indifferent] 

2T 

2D 

2nd  syll.,  the  3rd  being  long. 

long 

2t 

2d 

n                   „        M      short. 

long 

3T 

3D 

3rd  syll.,  the  2nd  being  long. 

[indifferent] 

3t 

3d 

,,                   ,,        ,,      short. 

long 

3e 

3rd  syll.  in  epic  reopening. 

long 

4 

The  fourth  syllable. 

long 

4A 

4th  syll.,  followed  by  caesura. 

long 

4B 

4th  syll.,  the  caesura  following  a  long 
fifth  syllable. 

long 

4b 

4th  syll.,  the  caesura  following  a  short 
fifth  syllable. 

long 

5 

The  fifth  syllable. 

short 

5g 

5th  syllable  in  Trochaic  Gayatrl. 

[indifferent] 

5A 

5th  syll.,  following  the  caesura. 

short 

5B 

5th  syll.,  followed  by  the  caesura,  the 
fourth  syllable  being  long. 

[indifferent] 

5b 

5th  syll.,  followed  by  the  caesura,  the 
fourth  syllable  being  short. 

long 

6 

The  sixth  syllable. 

long 

6A 

Gth  syll.,  after  early  caesura. 

short 

6B 

(&gt;th  syll.,  after  late  caesura. 

short 

7 

The  seventh  syllable,  not  being  final. 

short 

7g 

7th  syll.  in  Trochaic  Gayatrl. 

long 

7e 

7th  syll.  in  epic  semicadence. 

long 

7A 

7th  syll.,  after  early  caesura,  the  sixth 
syllable  being  short. 

long 

7a 

7th  syll.,  after  early  caesura,  the  sixth 
syllable  being  long. 

short 

7B 

7th  syll.  after  late  caesura. 

short 

8 

The  eighth  syllable. 

long 

9 

The  ninth  syllable. 

short 

10 

The  tenth  syllable. 

long 

11 

The  eleventh  syllable,  not  being  final. 

short 

Fin. 

Fin. 

The  final  syllable. 

[indifferent] 

In  trimeter  verses  containing  rests  (decasyllabic  and  defective  verses)  the 
syllables  following  the  caesura  are  numbered  to  correspond  to  the  ordinary 
rhythm :   the  '  rest '  is  therefore  counted  as  a  syllable. 

The  quantity  is  tabulated  as  '  regularly '  long  or  short  when  it  is  so  in  nine 
cases  out  of  ten  or  thereabouts :  as  '  preferably '  long  or  short  when  it  is  so  in 
about  three  cases  out  of  four.  For  a  more  precise  statement  in  the  case  of  final 
vowels  see  p.  111. 

The  position  of  a  final  vowel  when  followed  by  a  consonant-group  is  not 
denoted  by  any  oi  the  above  symbols,  but  by  Gb. 

This  table  does  not  include  all  possible  positions  in  Vedic  verse,  but  only  those 
that  are  of  practical  importance. 


CHAPTER    VII. 

DIMETER  VERSE. 

182.  The  Rigveda  contains  some  15,000  dimeter  verses, 
which  make  up  about  one-third  of  its  whole  bulk.  The  general 
character  of  dimeter  verse  and  its  principal  varieties  have  already 
been  described  in  §§  18—41  above :  its  distribution  amongst  the 
1  homogeneous  groups '  is  shewn  in  §  114.  The  statements  already 
made,  which  will  form  the  basis  of  the  discussion  in  the  present 
chapter,  may  be  shortly  recapitulated  as  follows : 

(i)  the  general  type  of  dimeter  verse  follows  a  metrical 
scheme  of  an  iambic  character,  namely  ^  -  ^  —  |  s,  •—  v  w  varia- 
tions from  this  scheme  being  comparatively  common  in  the 
opening  of  the  verse  and  occasional  in  the  cadence.  Verses  of  this 
type  are  found  (a)  in  the  lyric  metres  which  prevail  in  Group  I 
and  are  fairly  common  in  the  other  groups  of  the  archaic  and 
strophic  periods,  and  in  which  trimeter  and  dimeter  verses  are 
combined  in  many  different  arrangements,  (b)  in  Anustubh 
stanzas,  chiefly  in  Group  II  (Atri  and  Vimada  hymns),  and  less 
often  in  Groups  III  and  V,  and  (c)  in  Gayatri  stanzas  in  all  parts 
of  the  Rigveda,  but  especially  in  Groups  V,  VI  and  VII ; 

(ii)  the  *  Trochaic  Gayatri '  stanza  substitutes  a  trochaic 
rhythm  in  the  cadence,  and  is  found  most  frequently  in  the  Kanva 
hymns  (Group  V)  ;  and 

(iii)  the  '  epic  Anustubh '  stanza  consists  of  two  pairs  of 
dimeter  verses,  in  each  of  which  the  cadence  of  the  first  verse  and 
the  opening  of  the  second  approximate  to  the  rhythm  ^  —  -. 

In  order  to  appreciate  fully  the  history  of  dimeter  verse, 
it  is  necessary  to  replace  these  general  statements  by  definite 
measurements.     For  this  purpose  six  groups  of  hymns  are  selected 


150  Typical  dimeter  groups 

for  comparison  in  the  table  in  §  185.  These  groups  correspond 
generally  to  the  'homogeneous  groups'  defined  in  §  91,  but  are 
subject  to  the  further  restriction  that  each  of  them  consists 
entirely  of  hymns  in  which  dimeter  verse  appears  in  the  form 
most  characteristic  of  its  group.  Consequently  Group  I  is 
represented  exclusively  by  its  hymns  in  lyric  metres,  Group  II  by 
its  Anustubh  hymns,  Groups  VI  and  VII  by  their  Gayatrl  hymns : 
the  popular  Rigveda  by  the  hymns  and  fragments  in  which 
Anustubh  is  used  without  the  admixture  of  Paiikti  or  Mahapankti. 
Trochaic  Gayatrl,  however,  is  represented  by  all  the  hymns 
composed  mainly  in  that  metre,  without  regard  to  the  previous 
grouping :  the  larger  part  of  these  hymns  belong  to  Group  V. 
For  epic  Anustubh  the  forms  which  appear  in  the  odd  and  even 
verses  are  tabulated  separately. 

The  hymns  tabulated  in  §  185  include  rather  less  than  half  the 
dimeter  verse  of  the  Rigveda,  but  they  are  quite  sufficient  in  number 
to  illustrate  the  general  character  of  the  different  kinds  of  verse ; 
whilst  there  is  an  obvious  advantage  in  adopting  every  precaution  for 
the  homogeneity  of  the  groups.  In  Group  I  hymns  in  Brhati-SatobrhatI 
are  not  included,  because  this  metre  is  common  to  Groups  I  and  IY: 
whilst  Groups  III,  IV,  VIII,  and  IX  are  altogether  omitted  for  the 
present,  because  they  contain  comparatively  little  dimeter  verse,  and 
no  distinctive  metres. 

For  Trochaic  Gayatrl  it  is  necessary  to  disregard  the  grouping  of 
§  91,  on  account  of  the  small  amount  of  verse  composed  in  this  metre. 
The  list  of  hymns  is  given  in  §  197. 

In  metres  other  than  epic  Anustubh  the  rhythm  of  the  different 
verses  in  the  stanza  is  approximately  but  not  exactly  the  same :  see 
below  §  186  (last  paragraph). 

183.  The  opening  and  cadence  of  dimeter  verse  appear  to  be 
independent,  and  may  therefore  be  discussed  separately.  The 
quantity  of  the  first  and  last  syllables  being  indifferent,  each  part 
of  the  verse  has  eight  possible  forms.  In  the  opening  three  of 
these  forms  are  relatively  common,  and  may  be  distinguished  as 
the  normal  form  (-  —  -),  the  iambic  form  (^  -  ^  -),  and  the 

syncopated   form    (-  ^ ) :    in   all   of  these    forms   the    fourth 

syllable  is  long.  The  'normal'  opening,  as  appears  from  the 
table,  is  predominant  in  every  form  of  dimeter  verse,  usually 
including  rather  more  than  one-third  of  the  whole  number  of 
verses.  The  'iambic'  opening  is  almost  equally  common  with  it 
in  the  early  Anustubh  group,  and  again  in  the  odd  verses  in  epic 
Anustubh :  but  in  the  other  groups  it  is  distinctly  less  common, 


Dimeter  opening*  151 

and  in  the  'reopening'  (§  41)  of  epic  Anustubh  it  is  only  r.udv 
found.  The  'syncopated'  opening  is  rare  in  the  early  Anustubh 
and  in  the  opening  of  the  odd  verses  in  epic  Anustubh,  but  in  the 
Gayatri  groups  it  is  comparable  in  frequency  with  the  iambic 
opening,  and  in  the  reopening  of  epic  Anustubh  it  is  more  than 
three  times  as  common. 

There  are  three  corresponding  forms  with  short  fourth  syllable : 

of  these  the  forms ^,  ^  ^  -  ^,  are  each  about  one-third  as 

common  as  the  corresponding  forms  above,  except  in  the  reopening 
of  epic  Anustubh,  in  which  they  are  relatively  much  more 
common  :  the  remaining  form  -  -  ^  ^  is  only  about  one-sixth  as 
common  as  the  corresponding  iambic  form,  with  the  exception  (as 
usual)  of  the  reopening  in  epic  Anustubh. 

The  forms  of  the  opening  which  contain  consecutive  short 
syllables  in  the  second  and  third  places  may  be  considered  as 
irregular.  They  are  not  common  in  any  part  of  the  Rigveda,  and 
least  of  all  in  the  Gayatri  and  epic  Anustubh  groups. 

A  division  into  feet  of  two  syllables  is  not  traceable  in  the 
Rigveda,  and  therefore  the  usual  terms  applied  to  the  Greek  and 
Latin  classical  metres  are  unsuitable.  There  is  some  practical  con- 
venience in  speaking  of  an  ictus  which  falls  normally  on  the  even 
syllables,  but  is  transferred  from  the  second  to  the  third  in  the 
*  syncopated '  form :  and  also  in  speaking  of  the  '  general  iambic 
rhythm '  of  the  verse  as  a  whole  :  but  it  must  not  be  assumed  that 
the  ideas  which  these  words  connote  were  present  to  the  Vedic  poets. 

The  division,  however,  into  '  members '  of  four  syllables  each  seems 
to  be  fully  established.  The  complete  change  of  cadence  found  in 
Trochaic  Gayatri  has  no  effect  upon  the  opening,  except  slightly  to 
increase  the  frequency  of  all  the  less  regular  forms  :  whilst  the  change 
of  rhythm  in  the  reopening  of  Anustubh  verse  is  accompanied,  on  the 
contrary,  by  increased  strictness  in  the  cadence.  Even  the  adjacent 
fourth  and  fifth  syllables  appear  to  be  without  effect  one  on  the  other : 
for  in  the  comparatively  few  cases  in  which  the  fifth  syllable  is  long, 
the  fourth  syllable  is  also  long  in  the  usual  proportion  of  three-fourths 
or  more  of  the  instances. 

The  opening  of  epic  Anustubh  corresponds  almost  exactly  to  the 
opening  in  the  lyric  metres,  without  the  comparative  preference  for 
the  syncopated  form  shewn  by  the  Gayatii  groups.  In  the  reopening 
the  distaste  for  the  iambic  and  irregular  forms  is  more  marked  than 
the  preference  for  any  special  forms:  but  the  three  most  common 
forms  are  those  in  which  two  out  of  the  three  distinctive  syllables 
are  long. 

Of  the  irregular  forms  ^  w  ^  —  is  ten  times  as  common  as^w  ^, 
and  therefore  the  former  form  in  the  first  three  groups  is  not  very 
markedly  less  common  than  either  of  the  forms  —  —  v^  ^,  —  ^  —  ^. 
More   strictly    therefore   we   should   say   that  ^  w   ^   ^  is  irregular 


152  Dimeter  cadence 

throughout    the    Rigveda,   and    ^  v^   ^  -   in    the   Gayatri   and    epic 
Anustubh  groups. 

All  investigators  are  agreed  that  the  quantity  of  the  first  syllable 
is  indifferent  under  all  circumstances.  According  to  my  own  calcula- 
tions, a  long  syllable  is  more  common  in  this  position,  in  the  proportion 
of  11  to  10  :  there  is  perhaps  a  slight  natural  excess  of  long  syllables 
in  the  language. 


184.  Except  in  Trochaic  Gayatri  and  the  '  semi-cadence ' 
(§  41)  of  epic  Anustubh,  there  is  only  one  regular  form  of  cadence 
in  dimeter  verse,  namely  the  iambic  form  vy  -  ^  -.  In  the  lyric 
and  early  Anustubh  groups  all  the  variations  from  this  standard 
taken  together  hardly  amount  to  one-tenth  of  the  whole  number 
of  instances :  in  the  Gayatri  groups  they  are  only  one-thirtieth, 
and  finally  in  the  full  cadence  of  epic  Anustubh  only  one- 
hundredth  part  of  the  whole.  In  every  one  of  the  groups  the 
variation  which  differs  from  the  iambic  form  only  by  shewing  a 
short  sixth  syllable  is  about  as  common  as  all  the  other  variations 
taken  together. 

In  Trochaic  Gayatri  the  most  common  forms  of  the  cadence 
have  trochaic  rhythm,  but  the  length  of  the  seventh  syllable  is  of 
more  importance  than  that  of  the  fifth.  The  iambic  cadence  is 
fairly  common ;  the  forms ^  -  and  ^  ^  ^  *  are  rare. 

In  the  semi-cadence  of  epic  Anustubh  the  iambic  form  is  still 
the  most  common,  whilst  the  trochaic  form  is  among  the  rarest : 
the  rhythm  therefore  has  little  or  nothing  in  common  with  Trochaic 
Gayatri.     But  whilst  every  possible  form  is  permitted,  the  most 

common  after  the  iambic  form  is  ^ *,  and  next  to  it ; 

that  is,  the  two  forms   in  which    both    the    sixth   and   seventh 
syllables  are  long. 

Catalectic  and  heptasyllabic  verses  are  much  more  common  in 
Trochaic  Gayatri  and  among  the  odd  verses  of  epic  Anustubh  than 
elsewhere. 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  quantity  of  the  final  syllable  is  in 
all  cases  indifferent.  No  exact  method  of  measurement  is  available,  as 
position  is  indeterminate. 

The  special  cadence  of  Trochaic  Gayatri  can  most  easily  be  explained 
as  borrowed  from  Tristubh  metre.  This  explanation  would  also  account 
for  the  comparative  frequency  of  catalectic  verses  in  this  metre.  It  is 
therefore  convenient  to  treat  '  catalectic '  verses  as  shewing  a  variation 
of  cadence,  and  the  statistics  indicate  that  'heptasyllabic'  verses  should 
be  treated  in  the  same  way. 


Normal  dimeter  rhythm 


153 


185.    Table  shewing  the  distribution  of  the  variations 
in   Dimeter  verse. 


Lyric 

Anu§t- 

Troch. 

Gayatri 

Epic  Anustubh 

Groups 

I 

II 

Gayatri 

VI 

VII 

Odd  vv. 

Even  vv. 

Number  of  verses 

1275 

1068 

474 

1578 

1424 

551 

550 

The  openings: 

Normal        opening,  se 

392 

371 

329 

391 

336 

368 

317 

Iambic               ,,      ,  :=  _  ~  _ 

287 

337 

272 

282 

256 

307 

50 

Syncopated        „      ,  =  ~  — 

114 

111 

144 

155 

184 

111 

189 

- 

96 

73 

117 

71 

88 

103 

209 

^      _      w      s^ 

39 

34 

46 

33 

54 

33 

114 

Syncopated,  -  ~  -  *- 

42 

39 

46 

46 

61 

49 

103 

Irregular  openings 

29 

35 

46 

22 

21 

29 

18 

The  cadence : 

Iambic  cadence, * 

920 

892 

153 

974 

962 

403 

991 

(with  long  fifth) ' * 

6 

12 

15 

6 

4 

82 

5 

„       (with  short  sixth)  *■»  —  r  - 

42 

56 

25 

11 

20 

62 

4 

Irregular  cadence : 

Trochaic,       -  ^  -  - 

3 

2 

313 

0 

5 

24 

0 

Syncopated,  ~ 

4 

4 

213 

1 

3 

44 

0 

Other  forms 

12 

22 

252 

4 

5 

313 

0 

Catalectic  verses 

10 

8 

21 

3 

0 

31 

0 

Heptasyllabic  verses 

3 

4 

8 

1 

1 

11 

0 

Note.     All  the  figures  in  the  body  of  this  table  are  proportional  to  a  bulk 
of  1000  verses. 


186.  The  general  rhythm  which  is  found  in  lyric, early  Anustubh, 
and  Gayatri  verse,  and  also  as  regards  the  opening  in  Trochaic 
Gayatri  and  in  the  odd  verses  of*  the  epic  Anustubh  and  as  regards 
the  cadence  in  the  even  verses  of  epic  Anustubh,  may  be  dis- 
tinguished as  the  normal  dimeter  rhythm  from  the  special  forms 
found  in  the  cadence  of  Trochaic  Gayatri  and  of  the  odd  verses  of 
epic  Anustubh,  and  in  the  opening  of  the  even  verses  of  epic 
Anustubh.     In   some  particulars,  as  in  the  use  of  the  openings 

^ ,  ^ ^,  *  —  w  v,  the  normal  rhythm  is  almost  exactly 

the  same  in  every  group ;  but  in  the  remaining  particulars  there 
are  differences  which,  if  not  striking,  are  at  least  too  large  to  be 
the  work  of  chance.  These  may  be  summarized  in  the  two 
contrasts,  that  (i)  in  the  openings  of  early  Anustubh  the  iambic 
form  is  more  than  twice  as  common  as  the  two  syncopated  forms 
together,  whilst  in  the  Gayatri  of  Group  VII  it  is  only  equally 


154  Small  dimeter  groups 

common,  and  that  (ii)  in  the  early  Anustubh  hymns  irregularities 
either  of  opening  or  cadence  are  found  in  15  verses  in  each  100, 
whilst  in  the  Gayatri  of  Group  VI  they  are  only  found  in  5  verses 
in  each  100.  In  both  points  there  is  approximate  agreement 
between  the  lyric  and  Anustubh  groups  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
two  Gayatri  groups  on  the  other,  and  the  change  seems  therefore 
due  to  time  rather  than  to  metre.  We  have  therefore  the 
presumption  of  two  historical  tendencies,  which  may  be  shortly 
called  (i)  the  increase  of  syncopation,  and  (ii)  the  diminution  of 
irregularities.  We  proceed  to  trace  the  progress  of  these 
tendencies  by  examining  them  in  several  small  groups  of  hymns 
which  together  include  nearly  all  the  dimeter  verse  of  the 
Rigveda. 

The  groups  chosen  are  27  in  number,  and  they  are  selected  on  the 
same  principle  as  the  larger  groups  in  §  185,  namely  so  as  to  be 
homogeneous  both  in  period  and  metre.  The  groups  contain  on  the 
average  about  500  verses,  but  some  of  them  are  much  smaller :  in  this 
way  it  is  possible  to  bring  almost  all  the  dimeter  verse  in  the  Rigveda 
under  review,  though  there  are  a  few  hymns  in  which  the  metres  are 
so  mixed  as  to  elude  classification.  Of  the  27  groups  20  use  exclusively 
the  normal  dimeter  rhythm,  and  7  have  one  or  other  of  the  special 
rhythms. 

The  groups  are  composed  as  follows  : 

Archaic  period  :  (1)  Usnih,  i  79  4-6,  84  7-9,  92  13-18,  v  40  r-3, 
51  5-10,  72,  78  1-3,  vi  43,  51  '13-15,  viii  12,  13,  15,  18,  23-26,  98  1-6, 
ix  102-106;    (2)  Atyasti  and  allied  metres,  i  127-139,  v  87,  ix  111  ; 

(3)  Kakubh-Satobrhati,'  v    53,    viii    19-22,    98    7-12,    103,    ix    108; 

(4)  Uneven  lyric  metres,   i  88,   120   1-9,   v  24,   x  22,  93,   105,  132; 

(5)  Anustubh  of  bk  v,  and  also  i  84  1-6,  158  6,  175  2-5,  176,  ii  5, 
41  16,  17,  vi  2  1-10,  14,  42  1-3,  44  1-6,  59  7-ro,  viii  69  1-3,  7-16,  70  14, 
74  13-15,  89  5-7,  95,  ix  98-100,  101  4-16,  x  21,  24  1-3,  25,  26,  143; 

(6)  Brhati-Satobrhati,  i  84  19,  20,  v  56,  vi  46,  48,  viii  17  14,  15,  27,  60, 
61,  66  1-14,  69  17,  18,  70  1-12,  71  io-r5,  77  10,  n,  78  n,  87-89  4,  90, 
97  1-9,  99,  101  ;  (7)  Gayatri  of  Group  I,  viii  14,  17  1-13,  28,  31  i-t4, 
43-45,  102  1-18;  (8)  Gayatri  of  Group  II,  i  2  4-6,  3  1-3,  7-12,  ii  41  1-9, 
viii  38,  92,  93,  ix  101  1-3,  and  in  bk  v  and  viii  60-79  ;  (9)  Gayatri 
of  Group  III,  in  i  74-93  and  vi ;  also  i  172,  viii  80  1-9,  82-85; 
(10)  Trochaic  Gayatri  (see  §  197  i) ;  (11)  Paiikti  and  Mahapankti, 
i  80-82,  84  10-12,  v  6,  75,  79,  viii  31  15-18,  62  r-6,  10-12. 

Strophic  period  :  (12)  Brhati-Satobrhati,  in  i  36-50,  vii,  viii  1-11, 
33  1-15,  49-54,  and  ix  107;  (13)  Gayatri,  i  14,  27  7-9,  30  1-6,  viii  32, 
and  in  the  sections  just  named  ;  (14)  Trochaic  Gayatri  (see  §  197  ii). 

Normal  and  cretic  periods  :  (15)  to  (20)  Gayatri  in  six  groups, 
as  shewn  in  the  table;  (21)  lyric  hymns  and  verses  in  bks  iii  and  iv 
(see  §  94  i);    (22)  Anustubh  etc.  of  the  normal  period,  i  10,  11,  iii  13, 


Syncopation  155 

21  a,  3,  22  4,  53  ia,  iv  7  2-6,  37  5-8,  47,  48,  57  1,  viii  39-41,  42  4-6, 
47  1-12,  x  131  4,  133,  134;  (23)  Anustubh  etc.  of  the  cretic  period, 
i  28  1-6,  29,  105  1-6,  9-18,  142,  iii  8  1-9,  x  62  5,  8,  9,  176. 

Popular    Riuveda  :     (24)    Scattered    lyric   verses    (see   §   94   i) ; 

(25)  Gayatri,  i  23  16-18,  93  9-11,  97,  iii  28,  52  i-4,  viii  33  16-18,  102 
19-22,  x  9  6,  7,  57,  60  1-5,   101  4,  6,   119,   153,  158,  175,  186,  189; 

(26)  epic    Anustubh    hymns    and    fragments,    see   §    198   ii   and    iii; 

(27)  hymns  in  mixed  Anustubh,  Pankti  and  Mahapankti,  see  §  198  i. 

In  the  Anustubh  groups  the  variations  in  the  odd  and  even  verses 
are  distinguished  throughout :  where  Pankti  and  Mahapankti  are 
mixed  with  Anustubh  the  additional  verses  added  to  the  respective 
distich s  are  reckoned  as  even  verses. 

For  other  metres  this  distinction  is  not  made  in  the  table.  In  all 
the  lyric  metres  irregularities  are  twice  as  common  in  verses  beginning 
a  distich  as  in  those  concluding  it :  in  Gayatri  those  in  the  first, 
second,  and  third  verses  are  respectively  in  the  ratios  of  5,  3,  and  2, 
in  all  parts  of  the  Rigveda.     As  to  verses  of  four  syllables  see  §  192. 

187.  With  regard  to  the  developement  of  syncopation  it 
appears  from  the  table  in  §  195  that  in  the  archaic  period  the 
Usnih,  Kakubh-SatobrhatI,  and  uneven  lyric  groups  are  sub- 
stantially in  agreement  with  the  early  Anustubh  hymns  :  whilst 
the  Atyasti  and  Brhatl-Satobrhatl  hymns,  and  the  Gayatri  hymns 
of  Group  III,  do  not  widely  differ  from  them.  In  the  strophic 
period  the  Brhatl-Satobrhatl  and  Gayatri  hymns,  and  in  the 
normal  period  the  Gayatri  hymns  of  ix  1-60,  do  not  widely  differ 
from  the  early  Anustubh  hymns.  In  all  the  groups  named,  then, 
the  iambic  forms  preponderate  largely  over  the  syncopated  forms. 

On  the  other  hand  the  syncopated  forms  are  relatively  common 
in  two  of  the  Gayatri  groups  and  in  the  Pankti- Mahapankti 
hymns  of  the  archaic  period,  and  in  all  the  groups  of  the  normal 
and  later  periods  except  in  ix  1-60. 

Although  the  increase  of  syncopation  is  therefore  not  equally 
observable  in  every  group  of  the  normal  and  cretic  period,  yet  it 
is  very  marked  in  the  hymns  of  these  periods  considered  as  a 
whole.  This  increase  appears  to  continue  in  the  popular  Rigveda, 
so  far  as  can  be  judged  from  the  small  amount  of  verse  in  the 
lyric  metres  and  in  Gayatri :  for  in  groups  24  and  25  the  syn- 
copated forms  decidedly  outnumber  the  iambic  forms. 

The  occurrences  of  the  iambic  and  syncopated  openings  are  far  too 
numerous  to  be  recorded  separately :  but  more  detailed  information  is 
given  in  the  *  Table  of  hymns '  at  the  end  of  the  book. 


156  Irregular  forms 

188.  As  regards  irregularities  in  the  opening  the  groups  of 
the  archaic  period  shew  great  uniformity,  the  irregularities  being 
generally  about  3  per  cent,  of  the  whole  number  of  verses.  In  the 
strophic,  normal  and  ere  tic  periods  the  proportion  is  generally 
much  smaller,  but  in  the  popular  Rigveda  it  increases.  In 
Anustubh  irregular  forms  are  generally  more  common  in  the  odd 
than  in  the  even  verses.  As  the  variation  is  in  all  cases  between 
narrow  limits,  it  is  of  little  importance  in  comparing  the  groups. 

Irregularities  in  the  cadence  shew  much  greater  variation.  In 
the  archaic  period  departures  from  the  normal  rhythm  reach  the 
proportion  of  38  per  cent,  in  the  uneven  lyric  hymns,  so  that  the 
cadence  in  this  group  must  be  considered  as  constituting  a 
special  type;  it  is  discussed  further  in  §  196.  In  the  odd  verses  of 
early  Anustubh,  again,  the  variations  reach  13  per  cent. :  the 
general  average  of  the  archaic  period  is  7  per  cent.,  whilst  the 
hymns  in  Gayatri,  Pankti,  and  Mahapankti  are  much  more  regular. 
In  the  strophic  period  the  average  is  only  slightly  less.  Later  we 
find  that  the  two  Soma  groups  ix  1-60  and  61-67  shew  an 
extreme  regularity,  whilst  the  Kusika  groups  i  1-30  and  iii  do  not 
greatly  differ  from  the  standard  of  the  earlier  periods.  In  the 
Anustubh  hymns  of  the  cretic  period  irregularities  in  the  opening 
of  the  odd  verses  are  many  times  more  common  than  in  the  even 
verses.  In  the  lyric  and  Gayatri  hymns  of  the  popular  Rigveda 
irregularities  are  again  common. 

The  irregularities  of  the  opening^  ^  ^  ^)  are  substantially  of 
the  same  type  as  the  chief  irregularity  of  the  cadence  ^  ^  ^  -  : 
but  the  latter  occurs  the  more  commonly.  If  language  appropriate 
to  the  classical  metres  may  be  permitted,  we  should  say  that  in 
each  case  a  short  syllable  bears  the  ictus.  But  in  detail  there  is  a 
remarkable  difference.  In  the  opening  the  short  second  syllable 
which  bears  the  ictus  is  very  often  one  which  contains  a  final 
vowel:  in  the  cadence  the  short  sixth  syllable  is  almost  always 
an  initial  syllable. 

For  the  cadence  of  hymns  in  the  uneven  lyric  metres  see  below, 
§§  191,  196. 

For  the  'short  syllables  which  bear  the  ictus'  a  quantitative 
explanation  has  often  been  sought,  but  as  it  would  seem,  wrongly. 
The  final  vowels  found  in  the  second  place  have  been  thought,  either 
for  some  specific  reason  or  merely  as  final  vowels,  to  have  some  special 
suitability  for  positions  which  call  for  a  long  syllable :  but  if  this  were 


Irregular  openings  157 

so,  we  should  find  them  used  also  in  the  third  place  to  make  up 
syncopated  openings,  and  in  the  sixth  place :  whereas  they  are 
extremely  rare  in  both  positions.  Again  the  initial  syllables  which 
occur  in  the  sixth  place  have  been  supposed  to  have  some  special 
affinity  to  long  vowels,  and  it  has  been  noticed  that  the  same  initial 
syllables  frequently  recur  in  this  position.  But  it  has  not  been  shewn 
that  in  any  case  any  very  large  proportion  of  the  occurrences  is  found 
in  the  sixth  place :  and  as  in  the  previous  cases,  it  is  noticeable  that 
these  syllables  are  very  rarely  indeed  found  in  the  second  or  third 
place  of  an  irregular  opening. 

It  is  of  the  essence  of  quantitative  length  that  it  determines  the 
position  in  the  verse,  and  is  not  determined  by  it :  and  by  this  test  all 
the  syllables  in  question  are  genuine  short  syllables.  In  the  lists  of 
occurrences,  however,  attention  is  called  to  the  special  forms  and  words 
which  have  suggested  a  quantitative  explanation. 

If  we  consider  that  irregularities  of  both  kinds  are  most  common  in 
the  earliest  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  it  becomes  probable  that  their  later 
use  was  largely  due  to  reminiscence,  not  indeed  of  the  older  practice  as 
such,  but  of  individual  instances  of  it :  and  this  may  account  for  the 
apparently  arbitrary  difference  between  the  two  irregularities.  At  the 
same  time  a  reciter  would  be  tempted  to  give  an  artificial  intonation  to 
words  so  occurring,  and  this  is  probably  represented  in  the  text  by  the 
long  vowel  or  form  in  -o  for  which  in  many  cases  we  have  seen  reason 
to  restore  a  final  short  vowel  (§§  167  iii,  171  iv,  etc.). 

189.  The  irregularities  in  the  opening  are  about  350  in 
number.  In  one-third  of  the  instances  the  second  syllable 
contains  a  short  final  vowel,  or  -a  as  representing  final  -ah  or  -e ; 
but  only  in  some  20  instances  is  the  third  syllable  of  this 
character.  In  several  instances  the  text  gives  a  long  final  vowel 
in  the  second  place,  or  substitutes  -o  for  final  -a  (§  171  iv).  In 
addition  there  are  about  50  instances  of  uncertain  or  '  protracted ' 
final  vowels  (§§  162,  163)  in  the  second  place  where  the  third 
syllable  is  short. 

The  occurrences  may  be  grouped  as  follows  : 

(i)  The  second  syllable  contains  the  final  vowel  of  a  word  or  of 
the  prior  element  of  a  compound,  or  -a  representing  final  -ah  or  -e  :  i  4 
3c1,  10  4b2  4c3,  13  11a4,  22  2a  18a,  23  15a5  *24b,  28  2b6,*30  20a7,  37 
13a,  74  6a8,  81  2a,  91  13c1  15b,  *93  3c,  105  5c1  6a1  15b,  127  10d9  lid, 
129  3c10  8c1,  130  3gl  5c,  134  6d5,  142  11a4,  158  6a,  175  la,  187  4a; 
ii  6  4b11  8b,  7  2a1,  41  flOb12;  iii  24  2a7,  51  11a7;  iv  9 
4b5  5a  6b,  30  8b,  31  |4a12  5b13,  32  lib,  52  lc1  3a14  6c1;  v  6  9c5,  19 
2b,  20  4c1,  27  4a7,  35  3a7,  50  2b8,  *51  14c,  52  5b1  8b,  61  3c  4c,  74  6a, 
82  7c  9c8,  87  ed1;  vi  2  10a,  16  25b,  45  31a6,  47  23c'5  24a16,  48  12b1, 
56  6b7,  59  9c1,  61  lib,  *75  12c1 ;  vii  32  |24a12;  viii  2  27a  36c1, 
4  lid8,  5  14a,  6  25b1  31c5  47a,  7  10a,  12  27b  31b1,  13  9a5  12a  28c8, 
16  4a,  21  9a1   15a7,  22  9a,  24  9a  14a17  30c1,  26  lib5,  27  15b7,  28  5c'8, 


158  Irregular  openings 

30  la19  32  10b  17a1  19c,  33  13b  *17c5,  34  lc  =  2c  =  3c',  46  19b  22e16 
27a7,  54  7a,  56  lb1,  61  16b,  65  5a,  68  Id  10c,  69  13a,  72  4a  12a1,  74 
4d1  7b7  7c,  78  lb,  79  lb  9d\  81  8a,  83  7a6',  88  5a,  *91  3b6,  92  2cl,  93 
20a  34a1,  98  5a2,  *102  19a19;  ix  3  7a20  8a20,  9  7c,  15  la20  2a20  3a26 
6a20,  23  3b1,  27  la20  3a20,  28  2a20  4a20,  57  4b5,  61  3a10,  62  la7  11a20,  63 
4a7  9b1,  67  9c2,  99  4c5,  100  la12,  *114  3a;  x  26  2a  5b,  *58  7a7,  *86 
20a3,  93  13c,  *97  3b  *17a4,  102  lb1,  *119  6a19*lla,  126  2a,  127  7c1, 
132  2d2,  *137  6b1,  144  3b,  171  2b1,  *172  3a,  *174  2c2,  *186  lb. 

1  Final  -a  or  -o  for  -ah.  2  abhi.  3  -a  neut.  sing,  of  stem  in  -an. 

4  dva.  5  utd  (text  utd).  6  ddhi.  7  Final  -e  before  vowel.  8  ca. 

9  prdti.  10  pari.  u  vdsupati.  12  abhi  (text  abhi).  1S  ha  (text  ha). 

14  utd.  15  ddsa  (text  ddso).  16  ddsa.  17  lipa  (text  iipo).  18  saptd 

(text  saptd).  19  nahi.  20  esd. 

(ii)     The  third  syllable  contains  a  similar  final  vowel :     i   8  9b1, 

*23   16b1,   26   5a  9b,   84  2b,   86   7b1,  129  lc,  142  4a1,  172  lc1  2b1  ; 

*iv  57  5b;         v  5  3a1,  67  lc  2b  t5b3,  71  lb  2b  3b;         vi  44  la, 

45  26b;        vii  66  3b  8b;        viii  19  23c1,  31  5b1,  47  lb,  62  2a1,  67  4b, 

69  lie1,  93  9b1;  x  *90  2a1,  126  2b,  *146  6a,  *158  lb1. 

1  Final  -ah.  2  abhi.  3  reading  vdruna,  §  166  i. 

(iii)  Other  instances  :  i  5  lb,  12  4a  7c,  16  4b,  25  5b,  37  2a,  38  9c, 
42  3c,  46  12a,  84  4b,  105  6b,  127  7g,  128  le,  130  4d,  137  2g,  150  2a; 
ii  8  5a;  iii  62  10a;  iv  32  24b,  37  5a  6a;  v  7  2d  3a  7d 
8b,  18  5e,  27  4c,  35  8b,  39  4c,  52  3c  10a,  65  4d,  66  la  2b,  68  4a,  74  lc 
4d,  82  la,  86  2a,  87  8d ;  vi  16  19a,  45  17a,  48  5b  14b,  54  8b; 
•  vii  32  7b  15b  20a,  *55  5d,  59  9a,  6Q  7c  12d,  96  lb ;  viii  2  3b  9a 
26c,  4  14b,  5  35c,  6  46a,  8  23a,  11  2a,  13  2a,  18  7b,  19  5a  5c  14b,  22 
7b,  23  4b,  24  6b,  25  14b  19b,  26  24b,  31  12a  16a,  33  6a  14b,  36  7c, 

37  7c,  41  4a  4d,  45  31a  34b,  46  4b  8d,  62  4d,  66  8b,  69  5a,  71  2c  8b, 
72  8a,  83  3b  3c,  84  2a,  89  5c,  *91  lb,  92  lb  8c,  93  14a,  94  la,  101  5b, 
102  13b  *19b,  103  3b ;  ix  7  lb,  12  9a,  13  2b,  14  6c,  17  4a  8c,  23  3a, 
24  3a,  63  21b,  64  20b,  65  3a  14a  30a,  66  2b  20a,  67  14a,  98  2c,  *112 
3a,  *113  6b;  x  *59  8d  =  *9e  =  *10e,  *85  35a,  93  12c,  *97  5d  *15a 
*22a,  *136  3a  *6a,  *141  5a,  *145  6c. 

(iv)  *  Protracted  '  or  other  vowels  of  doubtful  quantity  are  found 
in  the  second  place  in  dimeter  verse  as  follows  :  i  22  4b,  25  8c  9c,  27  3c1, 
36  15a1,  42  5c,  50  6a,  80  3a1,  129  9b1,  *133  2c1 ;  iii  45  lb1 ;  iv  48 
Id1;  v  35  5c,  61  13b  14b;  vi  16  3a  14c  17a  17c  *48c;  vii  *55 
7c;       viii  3  11a1,  12  2a  2c,  17  10b,  19  16b  20b,  20  26b,  24  24a,  34  3a, 

38  2b,  46  25b1,  60  9a1  9b1  9d',  63  10c,  67  6c,  78  lOd1,  93  31b1 ;  ix  61 
19b,  101  la,  111  2e;         x  *72  7c,  *97  7a,  126  2c,  176  lc2. 

1  Imperative  in  -dhi,  -hi.  2  Neut.  sing,  in  -a,  §  175  i. 

The  distinction  between  final  short  vowels  and  those  which  are 
specially  '  capable  of  protraction '  cannot  be  satisfactorily  drawn  :  but 
it  will  be  noticed  that  the  number  of  the  latter  is  not  sufficiently  large 
to  affect  the  general  conclusions  drawn  in  this  chapter  with  regard  to 
the  irregular  openings. 

190.  Quantitative  variations  in  normal  dimeter  cadence  are 
increasingly  rare  in  proportion  as  they  deviate  from  the  standard 


Irregular  cadence  159 

form.  Hence  the  most  common  variations  are  (i)  the  long  fifth 
syllable  —  ^  -,  and  (ii)  the  short  sixth  syllable  ^  ^  ^  *  The 
long  seventh  syllable  is,  however,  a  rare  variation. 

The  trochaic  variation  -  ^  -  -,  and  the  syncopated  variation 
v^  ^  -  *  are  both  rare ;  they  may  in  some  cases  be  due  to  the 
influence  of  Trochaic  Gayatrl,  in  which  they  are  the  most  common 
forms. 

In  the  sixth  place  the  initial  syllables  of  words  like  ajdra, 
arusd,  dvase,  gtihia,  martitah,  vdruna,  sdvase,  hdvia,  occur  with 
considerable  frequency,  but  it  is  not  clear  that  this  frequency  is 
disproportionate  to  their  occurrences  in  other  parts  of  the  verse. 

The  irregular  forms  of  the  cadence  occur  as  follows : 

(i)  Long  fifth  syllable:  i  10  la  2c,  12  5c,  24  4a1,  25  16b,  28  8b, 
29  7a,  36  15a,  37  la  5b  11a,  42  10a,  43  8c,  48  3a,  90  2c,  *97  4a, 
175  4d;  iv  30  21c  24c,  31  7a;  v  6  la  2d,  7  8a,  17  2b,  38  2c, 
50  5b2,  *51  14b,  53  4a,  61  15b1,  64  2b,  65  2b,  70  3a,  73  4a,  79  2a,  82 
4b  7a,  86  6b;  vi  46  5d,  54  7a ;  vii  81  5b,  94  12a  12b;  viii  1 
5a,  2  15a  38a,  4  13a,  8  20a  21c,  9  2a,  10  5d3,  12  20c  24a,  16  9a,  19  36c, 
22  Id  18b,  25  16a',  28  3b1,  32  25c,  39  6a,  46  27b,  47  12a  12c,  54  Id, 
55  4a,  56  2a  4a,  60  3a  19a  20d,  62  9c,  67  7a  18a,  70  lid,  80  4c,  84  9a, 
*91  3b,  92  7a,  101  2b,  102  lie;  ix  5  7c,  15  la,  19  5a,  29  la,  30  2a, 
40  lc,  52  2c,  61  2a1,  62  21c,  98  7c,  107  8a  26b,  *113  6b;  x  *16  14d, 
22  lb  lc  9b,  26  2c  5a  6a,  62  5c,  93  lc  Id  2c  9c,  105  3a,  *119 
lc  =  *2c  =  *3c,  126  3c  3d,  127  4a,  144  lc,  *153  3c,  *158  2a,  *175  3c; 
and  frequently  in  the  semi-cadence  of  epic  Anustubh  and  the  allied 
metres. 

1  itthd.  2  see  on  rathas,  §  151  iii.  3  dthd  (text  dtha). 

(ii)  Short  sixth  syllable:  i  1  2a,  3  6b,  6  la,  7  4a,  8  6b,  9  9a,  10 
7a,  15  7a  10a,  16  la,  17  2a,  18  la1  3a  9c,  22  3a  6a,  24  3a,  25  7b  9b, 
27  9b  9c,  28  2a,  30  3b  4a  17a  21c,  36  5a  13b,  37  8a  13a,  38  3b  5a  10a 
14b,  42  4c  9b,  43  7a,  44  la,  46  4a  5b,  48  la,  80  10a,  84  2b  7a  20b2, 
86  lb  8b  9a,  *97  la  *lc  =  *2c  =  *3c,  105  4a  5c  8a  15a  17a,  127  3d  3g 
4c  5d  5g  9g  llg,  129  lc  3e  10c  lOd,  132  Id,  134  2d,  137  le  3d,  150  2a 
2b,  176  5b,  187  2b  7a;  ii  41  4a3;  iii  9  la  7b,  11  3c,  13  2d  6a, 
24  la,  27  10c  13a,  37  la,  40  7a,  41  8a,  45  la,  51  lib,  *52  2a,  59  8b, 
62  14b;  iv  1  2c,  15  7c,  30  9a,  32  4c,  37  6a  6c,  48  lb,  52  lc  2a; 
v  5  9c,  6  4b,  7  2a  2b  3c  4d  5d  7d,  9  3b  4d  5d  6c  t7a4,  17  Id 
4b  4c,  18  lb,  20  2b,  22  3c  4b,  25  la  3b,  26  9b,  28  4a,  35  la,  38  2b, 
50  la  lb  2b  2d  4a  4d  5a,  52  2a  5b  10a  10b,  53  12c  16b,  61  3c  7a  9d 
lie,  64  4a3  5d  6a  6b,  65  3a  4d  5a  6b,  66  5a,  67  2b,  74  5a,  78  2b,  82  4a 
5a  6a  9c,  84  lb  Id,  86  la  5b11  6e  6f,  87  le  4d  8e;  vi  2  2c  4b  4d  7b 
9b  9c,  14  Id  2b  3a  4c,  16  17c  18c  38a  42b  42c  45c,  44  3a,  45  23a  29c, 
46  9a  lib5,  47  24c,  48  3a  8e,  53  8c,  61  4c;  vii  16  Id  5a,  32  15d 
24d,  59  la  lb  11a,  66  la  2b  2c  4a  6a  7a  8b  9a  12b  12d  14d  19a3, 
94  8a;  viii  1  5b6  21b  29a,  2  lb  35b,  3  la,  6  35c  42c,  7  la  2b  14b 
34a  35b,  9  lb  20a,  11  2a  6a  9a,  12  14a  19a  26b,  13  12c  13a,  14  7a  13a, 
15  9b,  16  2b  8a,  18  4a  5a  9c,  19  3a  9c  35d,  20  17c  18d  20d,  22  7b,  23 


160  Irregular  cadence 

4b  11a  19a  26a,  24  7a  20a,  25  2a  3b  4a3  4b11  10a  14a  18b,  26  25a,  27  5a 
13a  18b  21a,  29  8b,  30  3a,  31  5a  12b,  32  10c,  33  14b,  34  la,  39  lb, 
40  9c,  41  5c,  44  21a,  45  7b  |22a7  37a  |38a7,  46  lb8  2b  9b  10b  24dB 
29b,  47  10a,  50  4d,  53  7a,  60  7a  10b,  61  8d  14b,  63  4a9  4d  10b,  66  9a, 
67  13b,  68  4b  11a  18b,  69  la  12a  16d,  70  5b  6b  8d  10a,  71  14a,  72  2c 
6c  7b  13c  17a3,  74  la  7d,  77  5a,  78  7a  7b,  80  4a,  82  8b,  83  3c,  84  5a, 
89  3a,  90  la,  92  10a  14a,  93  33b,  94  la  4b  5b,  98  7c,  99  7a,  101  3a3 
4b,  103  10b;  ix  1  6b,  11  4a,  16  2a,  23  6a,  24  7b,  29  5a,  48  3a, 
51  3c,  55  3c,  58  2b,  61  9b,  64  lc,  66  19a  21a,  67  25a  26a,  98  6a,  101 
|3a4  5a  lie  13d,  103  5b,  105  4b,  106  lb  6c,  107  lOd;  x  20  7a,  22 
5b  7c  lOd,  24  t2a12,  25  le,  33  2a,  62  5a  10a10,  *90  2b,  93  3c  6d,  *101 
4a*6a,  *102  Id  *12a,  105  8b,  118  6c,  126  la  Id  6c,  132  2c,  133  6d,  143 
la  3d,  *153  3b,  *155  5b,  156  4a,  *166  5e,  *173  3b,  176  lb,  185  3a;  and 
frequently  in  the  semi-cadence  of  epic  Anustubh  and  the  allied  metres. 
1  reading  somanaam  su-draiiam.  2  text  carta.  3  reading  mitra  varuna. 

4  text  abht.        5  text  avd.         6  §  142  iii  a.         7  vrsabha  (text  vrsabha).        8  §  142 
iii  6.  9  see  §  166  vi  a.  10  see  §  167  i.  ir§  174  i  a.      "  12  see  §  151  iii. 

(iii)  Trochaic  ending  (-w-*):  i  3  11a,  9  5a,  17  3a,  18  3b,  44  2b, 
120  2c  6c  7a  7d,  134  5e,  142  7a,  158  6a,  *191  lOd  *10f  *lld  *llf  *12d 
*12f ;  iii  11  6b,  24  lc,  27  6b,  *28  lb  *6b,  59  8c ;  v  5  4a  5a ;  vii 
*55  2a  *3a;  viii  9  15a,  14  8a,  24  19a,  27  2d,  29  7b,  30  2c,  32  24a1, 
39  6b2,  46  2c,  94  lb  9a ;  ix  101  12c,  105  la,  *113  4b;  x  25  9e, 
93  13d,  132  5c,  140  3d. 

1  reading  in.  -  reading  vwrtidndm  and  omitting  apiciam,  §  152  i. 

(iv)  Syncopated  ending  (vv  -  *) :  i  3  8c,  10  6d,  28  la,  37  lib, 
46  3a,  91  15a,  134  5d,  142  2a,  187  lie  lid;  ii  41  7a1 ;  iii  12  5b, 
27  3c,  62  12a  15b;  v  5  11a,  20  4d  4e,  51  9a,  61  18b  19a,  72  3a, 
74  2b1;         vi  47  23a;         viii  8  21a,  9  9a1,  20  8d,  25  10b1,  26  2b1, 

39  3c,  46  29a,  68  8a,  70  13b,  76  lib,  85  la1  9a1,  98  12a;         ix  5  2a, 

40  4a,  59  3a,  61  9c;         x  126  4a. 

1  reading  luiasatyd. 

(v)  Irregular  endings  (—  ^  ^  ^,  except  where  otherwise  noted)  : 
i  4  8b,  6  10c,  43  3a,  74  8b,  75  5a,  80  lOd  lid,  84  2a,  88  lc,  105  16a2, 
127  7c,  129  2d  2e,  150  la1,  175  3a,  187  lb  5a,  188  5a2  11a2;  iii  24 
5c,  27  lib,  *28  2a  *3a\  40  3b2,  59  7c,  62  14a;  iv  30  14a,  32  3a1, 
46  3a;  v  5  7b  10b2,  7  la2  7c3  10d\  9  la1  4c,  25  2a2,  50  3a,  51  8a2 
10a,  52  8a1,  53  12a1  12b,  61  la,  64  7a,  65  4b,  72  2a1,  74  5d  6a1,  75  5a, 
84  2c1;  vi  2  2a,  44  4a,  46  12d!,  47  24a;  vii  16  la,  32  18b1 
18d\  66  7b  18a,  74  5da ;  viii  1  30a24,  3  19dJ  24a1,  10  3c,  12  6c5, 
13  la1,  14  2a2,  18  8a  17b  20a,  19  32a,  25  24a1,  30  2b2,  33  la1,  36 
Id  =  2d  =  3d,  38  5a,  39  9a1,  43  11a1,  46  21d'  24a,  49  7a2,  51  la,  69  11a1, 
74  2a1,  85  8a,  89  5b1  5c,  93  3b,  98  8b2,  99  7b,  101  5a1,  *102  22a,  103 
7b  12a  13c1;  ix  33  6a,  40  3a1,  47  2c,  67  27a  28a2,  98  7b1,  101  6a 
16a,  *113  6d;  x  21  7c5,  24  3c5,  25  5c5  6e5  8c5  9c5,  26  7c1,  93  13a1, 
105  6b,  118  8a1,  126  2c1,  *158  la1  *3a  *4c1,  *175  la  *lc,  187  5a. 

1  ending  ~  —  -  (epic  cadence).  2  ending -.  3  §  151  iii.  4  see 

§  158  v.  5  These  verses,  with  the  verses  of  four  syllables  which  follow,  make 

up  trimeter  verses  with  regular  rhythm. 

The  trochaic,  syncopated,  and  irregular  endings  are  also  used  in 
Trochaic  Gayatrl  and  epic  Anustubh  as  shewn  in  §  199. 


Syllabic  variations  161 

191.  Syllabic  irregularity  usually  takes  the  form  of  the 
catalectic  verse,  with  the  cadence  ^  -  - :  this  is  fairly  frequent  in 
one  or  two  hymns,  and  seems  in  these  to  mark  an  attempt  at  a 
new  metre,  in  which  the  eighth  syllable  is  replaced  by  a  'rest,' 
and  the  cadence  is  therefore  the  same  as  that  of  Tristubh  verse. 
Any  such  hymns  belong  to  the  archaic  period.  Outside  these 
few  hymns  catalectic  verses  are  not  very  common. 

Other  verses  of  seven  syllables  (heptasyllabic  verses)  are  com- 
paratively rare,  and  it  seems  probable  that  in  most  cases  some 
metrical  restoration  is  required. 

Verses  of  nine  syllables  are  very  rare,  and  hardly  seem  to  be 
intentional. 

Perhaps  the  only  typical  hymn  in  catalectic  dimeter  metre  is  x  26 
(Anustubh).  Here  out  of  36  verses  23  may  be,  and  11  must  be, 
measured  as  catalectic  or  heptasyllabic  :  even  the  smaller  figure  is  too 
large  to  be  due  to  chance.  In  viii  68  14-19  (Gayatri)  there  are  3 
catalectic  verses  out  of  16,  if  we  read  a-arkse  for  drkse  in  16b  (§  151  i). 
The  number  of  such  hymns  is,  however,  very  large  if  the  syllabic 
restorations  discussed  in  Chapter  V  are  not  accepted. 

In  uneven  lyric  verse  the  proportion  of  catalectic  and  heptasyllabic 
verses  is  very  large,  and  this  may  be  directly  due  to  the  influence  of 
the  Tristubh  verses  in  the  same  hymns.  Hymns  i  120  1-9,  x  22,  105 
are  most  noticeable  in  this  respect. 

In  Trochaic  Gayatri  and  epic  semi-cadence  verses  of  seven  syllables 
are  not  uncommon,  but  this  seems  to  be  due  to  the  general  irregularity 
of  rhythm,  as  shewn  in  §  185. 

In  normal  dimeter  verse  the  instances  of  syllabic  irregularity  are  as 
follows : 

(i)  Catalectic  verses:  i  29  3b,  127  lOd  lie,  128  7g,  129  5g  8e, 
132  6e,  134  3d,  172  la,  175  lc,  176  5c,  187  7d,  *191  9b  *12b;  iii  8 
3c,  13  lb;  iv  15  7a,  30  9b,  48  2a;  v  7  8c  lOe,  27  5c,  35  2a  2b, 
38  3b,  52  16a,  86  5a;  vi  14  2a,  45  29b,  47  23c;  vii  66  2a; 
viii  4  7a,  10  4a,  17  11a,  18  15a,  25  13b  22b,  28  4a,  31  2a,  39  2d, 
46  lib  22e,  61  16d,  68  17a,  70  7a,  72  2a  7a,  74  13a,  75  2a  8b,  103 
2a  13b;         ix  12  3b,  21  5c,  53  la;         x  140  12a1,  176  4c. 

»  §  152  ii. 

(ii)  Heptasyllabic  verses :  i  6  4a,  105  5a,  132  6d,  175  4c  ;  iii  62 
16a;  v  7  10c,  50  2a,  86  6a;  vi  16  2b,  60  4a;  viii  24  30a, 
25  23a,  26  5b,  31  10c,  46  32a,  50  9a,  64  la,  69  8a,  71  10b,  74  4c  8a, 
84  la,  98  4b;         ix  18  7b,  98  8a,  *113  5b;         *x  119  11a,  *164  5c. 

(iii)  Of  hypersyllabic  dimeter  verses  hardly  20  are  to  be  found  in 
the  Rigveda :  many  of  them  may  be  removed  by  restorations  already 
suggested,  as  *i  191  6a  (prthvi,  §  151  iii),  iv  48  lc  =  2c  =  3c  (candrd 
§  84  A  1),  v  61  1 6c  (yajfiyasah,  §  135),  viii  19  37a  (prayi-vayi-yoh 
§  152  ii),  x  20  2a  (omit  agnini  §  152  i).  The  following  instances  are 
not  so  easily  remedied,  and  seem  rather  to  indicate  careless  composition : 

a.  11 


162  Verses  of  four  syllables 

i  *126  6a,  187  11a  lib,  *191  16d;         v  7  7d,  *51  15a;        viii  3  21d  ; 

ix  67  30b  30c;  *x  85  46c,  *158  2b  *2c.     These  instances  are 

not  included  in  the  tables. 

(iv)  Defective  verses  containing  only  six  syllables  are  found  in 
i  187  la,  viii  102  7a,  x  93  2b. 

192.  The  rhythm  of  verses  of  four  syllables  is  closely 
associated  with  that  of  the  cadence  of  dimeter  verse.  These 
verses  are  seldom  recognized  as  such  in  the  native  tradition,  but 
are  considered  as  forming,  with  the  dimeter  verses  to  which  they 
are  attached,  complete  trimeter  verses.  The  difference  can  as  a 
rule  be  readily  detected  by  the  rhythm. 

Thus  the  native  commentators  do  not  distinguish  the  two 
forms  of  Usnih  metre,  nor  is  it  possible  to  do  so  confidently  in  all 
single  instances.     But  if  we  compare  verses  such  as 

yena  hdmsi  ni  atrinam  \  tdm  imahe         viii  12  led 
dturtadaksa  y  vrsaria  vrsanvasu  viii  26  lc 

we  observe  that  the  first  has  the  rhythm  which  is  regular  in 
dimeter  verse,  the  second  that  which  is  regular  in  trimeter  verse  : 
and  if  the  former  rhythm  is  regularly  repeated  throughout  the 
hymn,  and  a  break  also  regularly  follows  the  eighth  syllable,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  we  have  before  us  the  combination  of  a 
verse  of  eight  syllables  with  one  of  four. 

The  great  majority  of  verses  of  four  syllables  occur  in  this 
'  Dimeter  Usnih '  metre,  which  may  be  regarded  either  as  a 
shortening  of  the  Anustubh  stanza  or  an  extension  of  the  Gayatri 
stanza. 

Dimeter  Usnih  is  found  in  i  84  7-9,  91  17,  iii  10,  v  51  5-7,  8-10, 
vi  43,  51  13-15/  viii  12,  13,  15  4-6,  18  t-9,  98  4-6,  ix  102,  106  1-3. 
Verses  of  four  syllables  otherwise  combined  are  found  in  *i  191  13,  ii 
22,  *vii  55  2-4,  viii  46  7,  18,  62  7-9,  97  n,  12,  98  10-12,  ix  60  3,  109  22, 
x  21,  24  1-3,  25,  126  1-7,  172. 

Dimeter  Usnih  hymns  cannot  be  quite  strictly  separated  from 
those  in  the  corresponding  lyric  metre.  Thus  the  hymns  named  above 
contain  the  following  trimeter  verses  :  iii  10  6c,  viii  12  28c  =  29c  =  30c, 
13  13c  15c;  and  other  Usnih  hymns  contain  verses  which  are  capable 
of  being  analyzed  as  above. 

There  are  about  150  verses  of  four  syllables  in  the  Rigveda.  All 
of  them  have  strict  iambic  rhythm  (as  tdm  Imahe  above)  with  the 
following  exceptions.  In  i  84  7-9  the  refrain  is  indra  angd  which  (if 
it  is  metrical  at  all,  and  not  a  prose  formula)  has  trochaic  rhythm.  In 
ii  22  (in  wThich  the  division  into  verses  is  very  uncertain)  we  find 
tuvisusmah,  sdti/a  induh ;  in  vi  51  1 5d  gopti  amd :  there  being 
altogether  eight  occurrences  of  these  variations. 

The  rhythm  seems  to  leave  no  doubt  that  the  four-syllable  verse  is 
derived   from  the  latter  half  of  dimeter  verse.     The  occurrences  are 


Regular  parts  of  the  special  types  163 

almost  entirely  restricted  to  the  archaic  period,  except  in  the  hymn 
*vii  55  2-4  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

Verses  of  three  syllables  appear  to  be  attached  to  stanzas  consisting 
of  two  dimeter  verses  in  v  24  2,  3,  4. 

193.  In  Trochaic  Gayatri  syncopated  forms  are  fairly  frequent 
in  the  opening.  As  however  all  the  less  regular  forms  of  the 
opening  are  rather  more  common  in  this  metre  than  elsewhere 
(Table,  §  185),  this'is  no  clear  indication  of  date. 

In  the  hymns  of  the  archaic  period  the  iambic  cadence  is  still 
found  once  in  every  five  verses,  but  in  the  strophic  period  it  is  only 
half  as  common.  The  characteristic  forms  of  the  cadence  are 
discussed  in  §  197. 

194.  In  the  epic  Anustubh  of  the  popular  Rigveda,  whether 
pure  or  mixed,  the  opening  of  the  odd  verses  is  similar  to  that  of 
the  early  Anustubh,  the  iambic  opening  being  twice  as  common  as 
the  two  syncopated  forms  together.  This  reversion  to  a  rhythm 
which  appears  in  the  interval  to  have  gone  out  of  use  is  remark- 
able. It  seems  unlikely  that  there  is  any  conscious  imitation  of 
older  forms,  for  the  whole  growth  of  the  epic  Anustubh  rhythms 
is  so  gradual  that  the  idea  of  deliberate  choice  seems  to  be 
excluded.  The  renewed  favour  given  to  the  iambic  form  in  the 
opening  must  therefore  be  due  to  the  instinctive  reaction  resulting 
from  the  growing  tendency  to  exclude  this  form  from  the  semi- 
cadence  and  the  re-opening. 

The  cadence  in  the  even  verses  is  extremely  strict  in  the 
Anustubh  of  the  cretic  period  and  in  pure  epic  Anustubh,  the  few 
variations  that  occur  consisting  exclusively  of  occurrences  of  the 
long  fifth  and  short  sixth  syllables.  In  the  mixed  Anustubh  of 
the  popular  Rigveda  variations  are  rather  more  common. 

The    forms    of    the    semi-cadence    and    re-opening    in    epic 

Anustubh,  and  the  stages  of  the  transition  from  the  ordinary  to 

the  special  rhythm,  are  further  discussed  in  §§  198,  200. 

Of  the  irregularities  in  the  full  cadence  of  mixed  Anustubh  verse 
in  the  popular  Rigveda  a  large  proportion  are  found  in  the  Mahapankti 
stanzas  i  191  10- [2.  These  verses,  though  rudely  dimeter,  are  not 
in  accordance  with  any  known  Vedic  metre.  Trochaic  endings  are 
common,  both  in  semi-cadence  and  cadence,  and  the  last  verse  of  each 
stanza,  as  it  stands  in  the  text,  begins  with  the  unaccented  word  tua. 
Further  the  stanza  that  follows  (13)  is  so  irregular  that  it  cannot  be 
brought  under  any  scheme.  If  these  stanzas  are  left  out  of  account, 
we  tind  much  the  same  regularity  in  the  cadence  of  mixed  Anustubh 
and  of  pure  Anustubh  hymns. 

11—2 


164 


The  small  dimeter  groups 


195.    Table  shewing  the  metrical   character  of  the 
small  dimeter  groups. 


Group 

No.  of 

verses 

Opening 

Cadence 

Iamb.  Sync. 

Irr. 

Irr. 

Archaic  period  :   all  hymns 

5763 

28 

17 

3 

7 

1 

Usnih 

691 

30 

17 

3 

9 

2 

Atyasti 

402 

25 

16 

3-5 

8 

3 

Kakubh-  SatobrhatI 

315 

26 

12 

3 

7 

4 

Uneven  lyric 

121 

32 

10 

3 

38 

5 

Anustubh:  odd  verses 

638 

33 

16 

4 

13 

,,          even  verses 

661 

33 

15 

2-5 

8 

6 

Brhati-  SatobrhatI 

458 

26 

16 

2 

7 

7 

Gayatri :  Group  I 

512 

22 

18 

1 

4 

8 

„       II 

915 

24 

21 

3 

6 

9 

„       HI 

551 

26 

18 

3 

5 

10 

Trochaic  Gayatri 

256 

29 

20 

4 

80 

11 

Pankti  and  Mahapankti 
Strophic  period: 

292 

32 

26 

3 

3 

12 

Brhati- SatobrhatI 

820 

26 

16 

1-5 

5 

13 

Gayatri 

572 

30 

16 

2-5 

7 

14 

Trochaic  Gayatri 

219 

25 

19 

4 

90 

Normal  and  cretic  periods:  all  hymns 

3580 

26 

21 

2 

3 

15 

Gayatri :    Mandalas  ii,  iv,  v 

449 

25 

20 

3 

3 

16 

ix  1-60 

1065 

31 

21 

2 

2 

17 

i  1-30 

609 

26 

22 

2-5 

5 

18 

n                  ii          ill 

241 

27 

26 

1 

9 

19 

ix  61-67 

576 

24 

27 

2 

1 

20 

„          cretic  period 

516 

24 

21 

2 

4 

21 

Lyric  verses 

118 

15 

15 

0 

4 

22 

Anustubh,  etc.   (normal  period),  odd  verses 

250 

27 

21 

2 

6 

„                            „                even  verses 

251 

22 

24 

0 

4 

23 

„               (cretic  period),  odd  verses 

95 

27 

19 

4 

16 

„                          „               even  verses 

101 

19 

23 

3 

1 

Popular  Kigveda: 

24 

Lyric  verses 

58 

13 

16 

2 

13 

25 

Gayatri 

218 

17 

28 

4 

12 

26 

Anustubh :   odd  verses 

551 

31 

16 

3-5 

60 

,,            even  verses 

550 

5 

30 

1 

1 

27 

An. -Pankti- Mah.:   odd  verses 

222 

33 

17 

2 

40 

,,            ,,          even  verses 

220 

18 

27 

2 

6 

The  figures  are  proportional  to  each  100  verses. 

196.  The  special  forms  of  dimeter  verse  are  those  exclusively 
found  in  uneven  lyric  metre,  in  Trochaic  Gayatri,  and  in  epic 
Anustubh.  The  hymns  in  uneven  lyric  metre  present  at  first 
sight  the  appearance  of  great  irregularity,  verses  of  7,  8, 11  and  12 
syllables  being  combined  with  very  little  system.  The  analysis  of 
the  rhythm  of  the  dimeter  verses  (§  199)  gives  another  impression. 
In  no  part  of  the  Rigveda  is  the  opening  more  regular,  three- 


Uneven  lyric  and  Trochaic  Gayatrl  rhythms    165 

quarters  of  the  verses  being  of  the  type  -  -  *  - ;  syncopated 
openings  are  exceptionally  rare.  In  the  cadence  of  the  verses  of 
eight  syllables  the  iambic  form  is  again  found  in  about  three- 
fourths  of  the  verses,  the  chief  variations  being  the  long  fifth  and 
the  short  sixth  syllable  :  these  variations  do  not  agree  with  those 
found  in  the  other  special  forms.  If  we  may  trust  the  general 
view  we  have  obtained  of  the  developement  of  the  dimeter  verse, 
the  uneven  lyric  hymns  represent  its  earliest  Vedic  type. 

The  list  of  hymns  has  been  given  in  §  186  :  i  150  and  viii  35  might 
perhaps  be  added.  The  character  of  the  rhythm  is  shewn  in  the  table 
in  §  199.  The  amount  of  matter  is  very  small,  and  only  one  hymn  of 
this  type  (v  24)  forms  part  of  any  of  the  family  collections. 

For  the  further  discussion  of  these  hymns  see  §§  240-244. 

197.  The  special  forms  of  the  cadence  in  Trochaic  Gayatrl 
are  shewn  in  §  199  for  three  groups :  of  these  the  first  two  are  the 
Trochaic  hymns  of  the  archaic  and  strophic  periods  respectively, 
the  openings  of  which  were  considered  in  §  193.  The  third  group 
consists  of  single  trochaic  verses  found  in  hymns  chiefly  composed 
in  the  ordinary  Gayatrl  metre. 

In  all  the  groups  the  forms  with  short  sixth  and  long  fifth 
syllable  are  rare,  and  the  trochaic  and  syncopated  forms  are  the 
most  common  ;  so  that  it  is  plain  that  the  metre  is  substantially 
the  same.  In  the  strophic  period  the  iambic  cadence  is  only  found 
in  one-tenth  of  the  verses  and  the  syncopated  form  is  as  common 
as  the  trochaic  :  so  that  it  would  seem  that  the  relative  change  is 
in  the  same  direction  as  in  the  opening. 

The  groups  referred  to  consist  of  the  following  hymns : 

(i)  hymns  of  the  archaic  period :  i  3  4-6,  90  1-5 ;  ii  6 ;  v  68, 
70,  82  7-9;     vi  16  25-27,  61  10-12 ;     viii  16,  71  1-9,  79,  81 ;     x  20. 

(ii)  hymns  of  the  strophic  period  :  i  27  1-6,  10-12,  30  13-15,  38  7-9, 
41  7-9,  43  7-9;     viii  2;     ix  62  4-6,  66  16-18,  19-21 ;     x  185. 

(iii)  isolated  trochaic  verses:  i  2  2,  7,  22  n,  30  10,  38  2  ;  iii  11  5, 
41  3,  8;  iv  55  8;  v  19  1,  2,  53  12;  vi  47  24;  vii  89  4;  viii  3  21, 
5  32,  35,  7  33,  11  4,  55  4,  68  16,  94  2 ;     *x  175  1. 

Isolated  verses  are  recognized  by  their  having  in  two  at  least  out 
of  the  three  verses  cadences  other  than  the  iambic  and  those  with 
long  fifth  and  short  sixth  syllables.  The  table  shews  that  such  verses, 
if  collected  together,  exhibit  the  characteristics  of  Trochaic  Gayatrl. 

The  difference  between  the  Trochaic  Gayatrl  of  the  archaic  and 
strophic  periods,  as  suggested  above,  rests  upon  a  comparatively  small 
collection  of  instances  :  it  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  possibility. 


166  Rhythm  of  epic  Anustubh 

198.  The  Anustubh  verse  of  the  popular  Rigveda  appears  in 
three  shapes  ;  (i)  in  hymns  in  which  the  number  of  verses  in  the 
stanza  varies,  that  is,  in  which  Anustubh  is  combined  with  Pankti 
or  Mahapankti,  (ii)  in  fragments,  usually  only  of  one  or  two 
stanzas,  attached  to  older  hymns  or  combined  with  other  metres, 
such  as  Gayatri,  Tristubh,  and  Jagati,  (iii)  in  longer  hymns, 
standing  separately  in  the  text.  The  forms  found  in  the  opening 
of  the  odd  verses  and  in  the  cadence  of  the  even  verses  generally 
resemble  the  normal  dimeter  verse,  and  have  been  already 
discussed  :  the  forms  found  in  the  semi-cadence  and  re-opening 
are  analyzed  in  the  table  in  §  199. 

In  the  semi-cadence  the  iambic  rhythm  is  still  found  in  two- 
thirds  of  the  verses  in  the  first  two  groups,  but  only  in  one-third 
in  the  last  group.  In  the  first  group  the  variations  are  fairly 
evenly  spread  over  all  the  possible  forms :  in  the  second  the  epic 

form  ^ ^  is  the  most  common  ;  and  in  the  third  this  and  its 

companion -form ^  are  together  as  common  as  the  iambic 

cadence.  Single  hymns  can  be  found  in  which  the  new  forms 
distinctly  preponderate,  and  these  are  presumably  the  latest  in  the 
Rigveda.  In  all  the  groups  the  trochaic  and  syncopated  cadences 
are  relatively  rare,  and  therefore  there  is  no  direct  connexion 
between  the  semi-cadence  of  this  metre  and  the  cadence  of 
Trochaic  Gayatri. 

In  the  re-opening  the  steady  decrease  in  the  use  of  the  iambic 
form  is  noticeable  :  it  is  found  in  18,  10,  and  2  per  cent,  of  the 

instances  respectively.      After  the  normal  opening  * the 

syncopated  form  ^  ^ is  most  common  in  the  second  group,  the 

epic  form  ^ ^  in  the  third. 

Here  we  have  every  indication  of  the  gradual  developement  of 
new  standard  forms  through  a  period  of  hesitation  and  experiment ; 
and  although  the  different  stages  of  this  developement  all  fall 
within  the  latest  period  of  the  poetry  of  the  Rigveda,  they  il- 
lustrate tendencies  which  can  also  be  clearly  recognized  in  the 
developement  of  dimeter  verse  in  the  Rigveda  proper. 

The  groups  analyzed  are  composed  as  follows : 

(i)  epic  Anustubh,  combined  with  Paiikti  or  Mahapankti  verses  : 
i  191  1-12,  14-16;  vi  75;  viii  47  13-18,  91;  ix  112-114;  x  58, 
59  8-10,  60  7-ia,  86,  145,  164,  166. 

In  most  of  these  hymns  iambic  re-openings  are  fairly  frequent :  but 
we  only  find  one  such  form  in  each  of  the  hymns  vi  75,  viii  47  13-18, 


History  of  epic  Anustubh  167 

ix  112,  and  none  in  ix  114,  x  145,  164,  166.     The  cadence  is  of  the 

type  ^ ^  in  one  third  of  the  verses  in  ix  114,  x  58,  164,  166.     It  is 

therefore  probable  that  the  hymns  ix  114,  x  164,  166  are  of  as  late  a 
date  as  the  hymns  generally  in  the  third  group.  On  the  other  hand 
i  191  10-12  and  x  59  8-ro  agree  entirely  with  the  early  Anustubh 
rhythm. 

(ii)  epic  Anustubh  fragments;  i  23  20,  22-24,  50  10—13,  90  9, 
93  1-3,  126  6,  7,  133  2-4,  164  51,  170  2-4 ;  ii  8  6,  32  6-8  :  iii  29 
1,  4,  ro,  12,  33  13,  37  rr,  53  20,  22 ;  iv  24  to,  39  6,  57  4,  6,  7 ;  v  40 
5-9,  51  14,  15,  78  5-9,  83  9;  vi  16  47,  48,  28  8,  48  22,  51  16;  vii  55 
5-8,  59  i2,  103  1,  104  25;  viii  33  19,  66  15,  100  7-9;  ix  5  8-n, 
67  31,  32;  x  9  8,  9,  14  13,  14,  16,  16  ji-14,  17  14,  18  j4,  19  (exc.  6), 
24  4-6,  87  22-25,  103  13,  109  6,  7,  142  7,  8,  161  5,  179  1,  191  1,  2,  4. 

This  group  is  remarkably  large,  considering  the  small  size  of  its 
separate  members.  It  is  of  course  difficult  to  define  the  rhythm  of  the 
single  fragments,  although  their  general  character  as  constituting  a 
transition  to  epic  Anustubh  is  clear.  The  only  fragments  in  which  the 
iambic  opening  occurs  more  than  once  are  i  133  2-4,  170  2-4,  vi  51  16, 
x  19,  87  22—25.  Many  of  the  single  verses  are  free  from  irregularities 
of  cadence,  but  this  is  not  remarkable,  seeing  that  in  the  whole  group 
the  iambic  cadence  is  still  shewn  in  two-thirds  of  the  verses.  Fragments 
containing  more  than  one  stanza,  and  always  shewing  regular  cadence, 
are  i  93  1-31,  vi  16  47,  48,  x  87  22-25.  The  last  fragment  therefore 
agrees  with  the  early  Anustubh  rhythm  in  both  points. 

(iii)  epic  Anustubh  hymns.  These  are  found  exclusively  in  the 
tenth  Mandala,  being  hymns  72,  90,  97,  135,  136,  137,  141,  146,  151, 
152,  154,  155,  159,  162,  163,  173,  174,  184,  190;  with  which  may  be 
grouped  the  wedding  hymn  x  85,  which  contains  long  sections  entirely 
composed  in  Anustubh. 

Amongst  these  hymns  there  is  only  one  which  contains  the  iambic 
re-opening  more  than  once,  and  at  least  once  in  every  ten  verses,  namely 
x  152;  this  hymn  and  x  141  agree  generally  in  cadence  with  the 
earlier  hymns. 

The  hymns  in  which  the  new  rhythm  is  most  pronounced  are 
x  72,  85,  90,  135-137,  159,  173,  174. 

The  following  are  the  examples  of  iambic  re-opening  in  the  popular 
Rigveda :  (i)  in  the  mixed  Anustubh  hymns,  vi  75  13d;  viii  47  13b; 
ix  112  2d,  113  4b  8b,  x  59  8b  9b  10c,  and  commonly  in  i  191,  viii  91, 
x  58,  60  7-12,  86  :  (ii)  in  the  Anustubh  fragments,  i  23  20d,  93  2b, 
133  2d  4d,  170  3d  4b;  v  51  14b,  78  8b;  vi  51  16b  16d;  vii  104  25b; 
ix  5  10b;  x  16  14d,  19  lb  7b,  87  22b  25b,  179  lb,  191  Id  2b:  (iii)  in 
the  epic  Anustubh  hymns,  x  85  12b  33b,  136  lb,  137  3b,  152  lb  Id, 
173  3b,  190  Id.  If  the  first  syllable  of  arista  is  not  reckoned  long,  as 
suggested  above  (§  167),  additional  examples  are  found  as  follows: 
(i)  x  60  8e  9e  lOd;  (iii)  x  97  7d,  137  4b. 

1  In  i  93  1-3  we  may  obtain  epic  semi-cadence  by  reading  su  in  la,  and  adyti  in 
2a.  But  these  readings  are  uncertain  (see  §§  160  v,  161  i  above) :  and  otherwise 
the  semi-cadence  in  this  fragment  is  iambic. 


168 


Table  of  special  dimeter  rhythms 


199.     Table  shewing  the  special  rhythms   of  uneven 
lyric,  Trochaic  Gayatri,  and  epic  Anustubh  verse. 


Uneven 

Trochaic  Gayatri 

Epic  Anustubh 

lyric 

1 

2 

3 

1          2          3 

No.  of  verses 

121 

247 

218 

70 

2221      2121      3351 

Re-opening 

Normal         opening, 

402 

33 

32 

24 

32       27       32 

Iambic               ,,       ,  ^ 

32 

29 

25 

28 

18       10         2 

Syncopated       „       .  *  • 

7 

14 

15 

25 

17       22       19 

M  _  _  w 

12 

11 

12 

10 

9       16      25 

~  _  w  ^ 

3 

3 

7 

1 

13       13       10 

K   . ^ 

3 

5 

4 

6 

10        9       11 

Irregular  openings 

3 

5 

5 

6 

13         1 

Semi-cadence 

Iambic         cadence,  «--«-* 

62 

20 

13 

12 

60      58       30 

Trochaic           „      ,  -  «-  -  - 

5 

33 

28 

28 

4         13 

Syncopated       ,,      ,  ~  &lt;-  -  - 

0 

16 

28 

18 

3        4        5 

_    _    _    ~ 

0 

8 

9 

7 

5        6       12 

Epic  cadence,  -  —  * 

1 

9 

10 

9 

7       11       18 

_     ~      s^     S- 

2 

7 

5 

13 

5         7       10 

Short  sixth,  &gt;~  ~  «■*  * 

7 

2 

3 

3 

4        5        7 

Long  fifth, ^ 

7 

2 

1 

2 

8        6       10 

Catalectic  verses 

13 

2 

2 

6 

2        14 

Heptasyllabic  verses 

3 

1 

1 

2 

2         11 

1  These  figures  state  the  number  of  even  verses  in  each  group,  the  number  of 
odd  verses  being  very  nearly  equal. 

2  From  this  point  the  figures  are  in  proportion  to  each  100  verses. 


200.  It  might  be  misleading  to  say  that  the  two  forms  of  the 
Anustubh  verse  are  used  side  by  side,  but  to  a  certain  extent  they 
overlap.  In  the  Rigveda  proper  there  is  no  hymn  or  fragment 
which  has  the  character  of  any  one  of  the  groups  found  in  the 
popular  Rigveda :  but  the  Kanva  hymns  possibly  shew  the 
beginnings  of  the  new  rhythm  both  in  semi-cadence  and  in  the 
re-opening,  and  these  features  are  clearly  marked  in  the  Anustubh 
hymns  of  the  cretic  period.  On  the  other  hand  the  hymns  of 
Mandalas  i,  iii  and  iv,  and  the  Mahapankti  hymns  of  viii  39-42, 
x  131-134  shew  no  clear  trace  of  this  developement.  In  the 
popular  Rigveda  there  are  five  hymns  which  represent  the  old 
rhythm,  namely  i  191  10-12,  x  59  8-10,  87  22-25,  141,  and  152  :  but 
they  comprise  a  trifling  proportion  of  the  Anustubh  verse  of  that 
part  of  the  Rigveda. 


The  cretic  period  marks  a  transition         169 

The  amount  of  matter  in  Anustubh  verse  in  the  intermediate  groups 
between  III  and  X  is  so  small  that  we  cannot  satisfactorily  determine 
the  rhythm  used.  The  Vasistha  family  has  no  hymns  in  this  metre. 
The  Kanvas  use  it  in  i  45,  49,  viii  8,  9  r6-i8,  34  1-15  :  the  rhythm  of 
the  opening  might  be  either  early  or  late,  but  that  of  the  re-opening 
rather  resembles  the  late  metre.  Divodasa  has  only  a  few  verses  in 
Mandala  iv ;  the  prevalence  of  syncopation  in  both  openings  seems  to 
shew  that  the  metre  is  influenced  by  Gayatri.  The  group  viii  39-42 
also  favours  syncopation  :  but  viii  47  1-12  appears  to  be  later,  whilst 
x  131-134  agree  with  the  earliest  hymns,  except  in  the  regularity  of 
the  cadence.  The  Kusika  hymns  i  10,  11  agree  in  rhythm  with  the 
earliest  period,  whilst  the  few  verses  in  bk  iii  agree  with  the  Divodasa 
hymns  in  character.  The  hymns  of  the  cretic  period,  however,  shew  a 
distinct  approximation  to  those  of  the  popular  Rigveda  in  all  points  : 
they  are  i  28  1-6,  29,  105,  142  ;  iii  8  :  x  62,  176. 

Of  hymns  in  the  popular  Rigveda  with  the  old  rhythm  two  are 
Mahapankti  triplets,  namely  i  191  10-12,  x  59  8-10.  In  x  87  22-25 
and  141  the  linguistic  notes  of  early  and  late  date  are  about  evenly 
divided,  so  that  the  hymns  may  belong  to  a  transition  period.  There 
remains  x  152,  which  certainly  combines  the  language  of  the  later 
Rigveda  with  the  early  Anustubh  rhythm  :  but  too  much  importance 
must  not  be  attached  to  a  single  short  hymn. 

The  proportional  figures  for  these  small  groups  are  given  below,  but 
the  whole  number  of  verses  is  generally  so  low  that  no  decisive  weight 
can  be  attached  to  them. 


Table  shewing  the  rhythm  of  small  groups  of 
Anustubh  verse. 


Groups 

Odd 

verses 

Even 

verses 

I 

No. 

L 

Sync. 

Cad. 

No. 

I. 

Sync. 

Cad. 

I-IH 

Early  Anustubh 

638 

33 

16 

13 

661 

33 

15 

8 

V 

Kanva 

98 

32 

8 

4 

98 

12 

25 

1 

VI 

Divodasa:  bk  iv 

38 

29 

21 

7 

38 

7 

32 

2 

viii  39-42 

91 

18 

28 

4 

85 

10 

25 

6 

47  1-12 

27 

48 

3 

3 

27 

22 

18 

6 

x  131-134 

32 

40 

25 

0 

39 

40 

18 

3 

VII 

Kusika:  i  10,  11 

40 

33 

8 

8 

40 

35 

20 

3 

iii 

22 

9 

27 

9 

22 

27 

32 

9 

VIII,  IX 

Cretic  period 

95 

27 

19 

16 

101 

19 

23 

0 

X 

Popular  Rigveda 

Mixed  Anustubh 

221 

35 

17 

40 

222 

18 

17 

6 

Fragments 

212 

32 

22 

42 

212 

10 

22 

1 

Anustubh  hymns 

336 

30 

14 

60 

336 

2 

19 

1 

The  figures  are  in  proportion  to  each  100  verses. 


170  General  history  of  dimeter  verse 

201.  The  analysis  of  dimeter  verse  in  the  Rigveda  shews  that 
a  series  of  changes  take  place  in  the  rhythm,  which  correspond 
generally  to  changes  in  the  form  of  the  stanza.  These  changes 
may  be  recapitulated  as  follows  : 

The  earliest  type  is  shewn  us  in  the  Anustubh  hymns  of  the 
Atri  and  Vimada  families,  and  in  the  uneven  lyric  hymns.  Here 
the  '  normal '  and  iambic  rhythms  are  equally  common  in  the 
opening,  all  other  forms  being  occasional :  in  the  cadence  the 
iambic  rhythm  is  alone  regular,  but  variations  are  common  as 
compared  with  the  later  periods.  Hymns  in  Usnih,  Atyasti,  and 
Kakubh-Satobrhati  do  not  greatly  differ  from  this  type,  but  the 
iambic  opening  is  rather  less  common,  and  the  iambic  cadence 
rather  more  strict. 

Many  Gayatii  hymns  have  a  rhythm  of  the  type  just  described  ; 
but  the  great  majority  of  hymns  in  this  metre  differ  from  it  in 
favouring  the  syncopated  openings  at  the  cost  of  the  iambic 
opening.  The  same  tendency  can  be  observed  in  several  hymns 
in  Anustubh,  Pankti,  and  Mahapankti :  but  otherwise  the  develope- 
ment  of  syncopation  does  not  coexist  with  variety  of  form  in  the 
stanza.  A  systematic  use  of  trochaic  cadence  is  found  in  many 
Gayatri  hymns,  and  in  one  or  two  in  other  metres. 

Even  in  the  archaic  period  the  iambic  cadence  was  more 
strictly  adhered  to  in  the  even  than  in  the  odd  verses :  a  corre- 
sponding restriction  of  syncopated  openings  to  the  even  verses  laid 
the  basis  for  the  developement  of  the  epic  Anustubh  metre.  The 
beginnings  of  this  new  rhythm  are  found  either  in  fragments  or  in 
hymns  mixed  with  Pankti  and  Mahapankti :  but  in  the  course  of 
time  it  developed  into  the  precise  but  delicate  and  varied  metre 
which  we  find  in  the  latest  hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  and  which 
already  shews  the  essential  features  of  the  sloka  of  Sanskrit  epic 
poetry. 

The  following  further  explanations  on  these  points  may  be 
acceptable  : 

(i)  The  position  that  the  Atri  Anustubh  hymns  are  amongst  the 
earliest  in  the  Rigveda  is  confirmed  by  the  great  frequency  of  hiatus  in 
these  hymns  (see  §  132).  That  the  Vimada  hymns  of  bk  x,  and  the 
hymns  in  uneven  lyric  metres,  nearly  all  of  which  are  also  found  in 
bk  x,  should  also  be  ranked  with  the  earliest  hymns  of  the  Rigveda 
will  run  counter  to  the  presumption  usually  entertained  that  the  hymns 
in  this  book  are  later  in  date.  But  the  'irregularity  '  of  these  hymns, 
usually  considered  an  evidence  of  their  late  date,  is  really  an  argument 


Anustubh  the  earliest  metre  171 

to  the  contrary  :  for  the  verse  of  the  popular  Rigveda,  though  irregular 
in  some  points,  is  exceedingly  strict  in  othors  :  and  the  rhythm  of  the 
uneven  lyric  hymns,  as  well  as  their  vocabulary,  is  in  general  agreement 
with  that  of  the  Atri  Anustubh  hymns.  Further,  the  rhythm  of  the 
trimeter  verses  in  these  hymns  agrees  with  the  earliest  type  of  trimeter 
verse,  as  will  be  seen  later.  We  seem  therefore  led  to  the  view  that 
the  tenth  Mandala  preserves  for  us  many  hymns  which  could  not  find 
a  place  in  the  'family  books'  because  they  did  not  conform  to  a  proper 
metrical  standard. 

(ii)  The  complexity  of  the  lyric  metres  has  led  to  a  general  belief 
that  they  must  be  of  comparatively  late  developement.  In  particular, 
this  has  been  felt  with  regard  to  the  Atyasti  hymns  i  127-139. 
Undoubtedly  these  elaborate  stanzas  presuppose  earlier  and  simpler 
forms  :  but  it  is  not  necessary  that  these  earlier  forms  should  be  such  as 
the  Rigveda  has  preserved.  We  find  however  in  the  Anustubh  hymns 
of  Atri  and  Vimada,  and  in  the  uneven  lyric  hymns,  all  the  materials 
necessary  for  the  construction  of  the  more  elaborate  metres,  namely  the 
dimeter  verse,  the  verse  of  four  syllables,  and  the  trimeter  verse.  The 
mutual  influence  of  the  dimeter  verse  of  eight  syllables  and  the  trimeter 
verse  of  eleven  is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  creation  of  a  dimeter 
verse  of  seven  syllables  and  a  trimeter  verse  of  twelve  :  in  uneven  lyric 
metre  all  these  varieties  are  combined,  but  in  the  later  lyric  poetry  only 
verses  of  eight  and  of  twelve  syllables  are  used. 

(iii)  The  combination  of  Brhati  and  Satobrhati  metres  is  found  in 
two  distinct  stages.  In  the  archaic  period  these  metres  are  variously 
combined,  other  metres  being  often  found  by  their  side  :  such  hymns 
are  v  56,  vi  48,  viii  66,  70  1-12,  87,  97  1-9,  101  :  in  other  cases 
fragments  in  these  metres  are  appended  to  hymns  in  a  different  metre, 
as  in  i  84,  viii  17,  69,  77,  78;  complete  and  regular  hymns  are  rare. 
On  the  other  hand  in  the  Vasistha  and  Kanva  collections  the  hymns 
are  regularly  composed  in  alternate  Brhati  and  Satobrhati  stanzas,  the 
variations  being  comparatively  unimportant.  The  Brhati  metre  is  still 
occasionally  used  in  the  normal  period,  as  in  the  third  Mandala  :  it  is 
therefore  the  last  survivor  of  the  lyric  metres. 

(iv)  Gay  atri  on  the  whole  appears  to  be  later  than  Anustubh  and 
the  lyric  metres.  This  is  first  suggested  by  the  form  of  the  stanza  :  for 
the  whole  balance  of  the  Indo-European  structure  of  metre  is  based 
upon  duality,  and  the  stanza  of  three  verses  seems  to  be  a  reduction 
from  the  normal  stanza  of  four.  But  although  the  trimeter  stanza  of 
three  verses  hardly  belongs  to  the  earliest  part  of  the  Rigveda,  several 
of  the  uneven  and  other  lyric  metres  have  a  stanza  of  three  verses,  and 
it  is  impossible  to  doubt  the  antiquity  of  Gayatri  metre  as  used  in  a 
hymn  like  viii  46,  in  combination  with  lyric  metres.  We  have  also 
found  that  some  groups  of  the  Gayatri  hymns,  for  instance  Nos.  9  and 
18  above  (table,  §  195),  shew  in  the  opening  the  same  general  character 
as  the  lyric  hymns.  But  whilst  the  archaic  and  strophic  periods 
furnished  their  proportion  of  Gayatri  verse,  the  great  mass  of  Gayatri 
hymns  in  the  Rigveda  is  distinguished  by  characteristics  which  suggest 
a  later  date,  and  at  the  same  time  furnish  a  transition  to  the  metres  of 
the  popular  Rigveda.     These   characteristics   are  the   growth   of  the 


172  Transition  metres 

syncopated  opening,  the  increased  regularity  of  the  cadence,  and  the 
differentiation  of  the  verses  according  to  their  position  in  the  stanza. 

(v)  The  use  of  the  trochaic  cadence  cannot  be  restricted  to  any  one 
period.  It  is  systematic  in  the  Vimada  hymn  x  20,  belonging  to  a 
group  which  we  have  reason  to  think  one  of  the  earliest  in  the  Rigveda : 
but  the  longest  hymn  in  Trochaic  Gayatri  is  viii  2,  which  belongs  to  a 
Kanva  group  and  records  the  name  of  more  than  one  member  of  the 
Kanva  family:  whilst  in  iii  16  we  find  trochaic  cadence  in  a  Brhati 
hymn,  the  metre  being  characteristic  of  a  Mandala  which  contains  few, 
if  any,  hymns  earlier  than  the  normal  period. 

(vi)  The  Kusika  groups  i  1-30,  iii,  in  which  dimeter  verse  is 
represented  almost  exclusively  by  Gayatri,  shew  remarkable  favour  to 
syncopation,  but  are  very  much  less  regular  in  cadence  than  other 
hymns  of  the  normal  period.  Of  the  variations  31  are  of  the  short 
sixth  syllable,  10  are  trochaic  or  syncopated,  and  there  are  four 
examples  each  of  the  long  fifth  and  irregular  forms.  There  are  no 
catalectic  verses  and  only  2  of  seven  syllables.  The  high  proportion  of 
forms  with  short  sixth  syllable,  and  of  trochaic  and  syncopated  forms, 
seems  to  be  specially  characteristic  of  this  family. 

(vii)  As  might  be  expected,  the  Gayatri  groups  of  Mandala  ix 
elude  classification.  In  the  longer  hymns  1-60  syncopation  is  not  a 
striking  feature,  and  it  is  probable  that  many  of  the  hymns  belong  to 
the  earlier  family  collections,  though  we  have  no  means  of  identifying 
these.  In  the  whole  of  the  book  the  regularity  of  the  cadence  is 
striking. 

(viii)  Pankti  and  Mahapankti,  as  distinct  metres,  help  to  bridge 
the  gap  between  the  Rigveda  proper  and  the  late  Rigveda.  In  the 
archaic  period  these  metres  seem  to  have  been  hardly  known,  for  it 
is  difficult  to  find  hymns  in  which  syncopation  is  not  prevalent.  It 
is  quite  clear  that  the  differentiation  of  odd  and  even  verses  which 
led  to  the  developement  of  epic  Anustubh  was  attempted  in  these 
metres  :  but  as  before,  the  more  elaborate  form  of  the  stanza  was 
necessarily  abandoned  when  increased  attention  was  given  to  the 
rhythm  of  the  single  verse. 

(ix)  Throughout  this  chapter  the  theories  of  hiatus  and  syllabic 
and  quantitative  restoration  explained  in  Chapters  IV-YI  have  been 
assumed.  Critics  who  are  disposed  to  adhere  more  closely  to  the  text 
will  of  course  find  a  larger  proportion  of  irregularities  throughout  the 
Rigveda.  But  as  these  will  be  found  to  occur  most  freely  in  the 
archaic  period,  the  general  conclusion  that  that  period  is  characterized 
by  some  degree  of  irregularity  will  rather  be  strengthened  by  such  a 
view.  On  the  other  hand  the  irregularities  recorded  in  this  chapter 
may  be  on  the  whole  regarded  as  irremediable  by  any  process  of 
restoration,  and  therefore  specially  valuable  as  evidence. 

(x)  The  view  of  P.  von  Bradke1,  that  the  Rigveda  represents  the 
period  of  decay  of  the  old  Indian  lyric  poetry,  is  not  borne  out  by  the 
analysis  of  the  metre.     On  the  contrary,  we  seem  to  have  specimens  of 

1  Dyaus  Asura  (Halle,  1882),  p.  2. 


Technical  skill  in  dimeter  verge  173 

composition  in  various  styles,  leading  up  from  the  rude  early  metres  to 
the  perfect  form  of  the  Brhati-SatobrhatT  hymns  of  the  strophic  period. 
The  sudden  disappearance  of  this  kind  of  composition  coincides  with  a 
fresh  elaboration  of  the  rhythm  of  single  verses  :  and  the  latest  metrical 
schemes  of  the  Rigveda,  even  if  less  attractive  to  the  European  ear,  can 
hardly  be  described  as  intrinsically  less  beautiful  in  design  or  less 
perfect  in  execution  than  their  predecessors. 

202.  Whatever  difficulties  may  be  felt  to  attend  the  explana- 
tions given  in  this  chapter  of  particular  rhythms,  it  must  at  least 
be  clear  that  Vedic  dimeter  verse  cannot  be  explained  rightly  by 
any  of  the  methods  applied  to  modern  European  verse  or  even 
by  those  which  are  applied  to  the  classical  Greek  and  Latin 
metres.  The  essentially  syllabic  character  of  Vedic  verse  produces 
an  impression  of  great  simplicity  on  first  acquaintance  :  but  this 
simplicity  is  only  on  the  surface,  and  is  consistent  with  great  skill 
in  the  disposition  of  words  and  syllables  to  produce  a  required 
rhythmical  result,  which  may  be  of  a  highly  complicated  character. 

Although  Vedic  verse  shares  with  Greek  and  Latin  the  system 
of  quantities,  yet  there  is  no  trace  in  it  of  the  principle  that  one 
long  syllable  is  equivalent  to  two  short,  nor  can  we  trace  any 
division  into  feet  corresponding  to  the  standard  feet  of  classical 
verse. 

Modern  European  verse,  though  based  on  accent  instead  of 
quantity,  agrees  with  Greek  and  Latin  in  taking  the  foot  for  its 
unit,  and  assumes  an  iambic  or  trochaic  rhythm  as  the  necessary 
basis  for  almost  every  metre.  All  Western  scholars  are  under  the 
temptation  to  attribute  to  the  poets  of  the  Rigveda  at  least  a 
wish  to  follow  the  same  standard :  but  the  facts  prove  that  the 
types  which  really  floated  before  their  minds  were  often  of  a 
quite  different  character. 

Statistics  perform  a  useful  purpose  in  counteracting  errors  which 
arise  from  acquired  prepossessions,  and  are  not  necessarily  eliminated 
even  by  wide  reading.  Thus  many  Vedic  scholars,  having  discovered 
an  '  iambic  rhythm '  in  dimeter  verse,  conclude  that  the  third  syllable 
is  preferably  short,  either  in  the  sense  that  it  is  more  often  short  than 
long,  or  that  the  poets  would  at  least  wish  it  to  be  so  if  they  were  not 
hindered  by  intractable  material. 

Yet  both  these  suppositions  are  demonstrably  wrong.  As  a  fact, 
long  syllables  in  this  place  are  almost  twice  as  common  as  short ;  and 
so  regularly  is  this  the  case,  that  in  the  whole  Rigveda  it  would  be  hard 
to  find  ten  successive  dimeter  stanzas  in  which  the  short  syllable  is 
equally  common.  Yet  the  poet  had  no  difficulty  in  his  material,  for  in 
the  cadence  he  successfully  achieves  this  very  rhythm,  in  one  period 


174  Pure  iambic  rhythm  not  sought 

in  nine  verses  out  of  ten,  in  another  in  ninety-nine  verses  out  of  a 
hundred. 

Again,   neither  from  the  classical  nor  the  modern  standpoint  do 

such  sequences  as  — and  ^  ^  ^  —  suggest  any  kind  of  rhythmical 

effect :  yet  the  former  is  in  all  periods  the  favourite  Vedic  opening,  and 
the  latter  the  second  in  favour  amongst  possible  cadences. 

It  appears  on  the  whole  that  '  iambic  rhythm '  lay  for  the  Vedic 
poet  in  the  past :  it  was  part  of  an  inheritance  upon  which  he  desired 
to  improve.  The  existence  of  this  rhythm  in  the  very  earliest  forms  of 
Vedic  poetry  seems  to  set  a  great  gap  between  it  and  the  apparently 
non-quantitative  verse  of  the  Avesta.  At  the  same  time  we  are  not 
yet  entitled  to  assume  that  there  existed  at  an  earlier  period  verse  more 
rigidly  iambic  in  character  than  that  preserved  to  us  in  the  earliest 
hymns  of  the  Rigveda.  Any  conjectures  as  to  the  character  of  pre- 
Vedic  verse  would  be  premature  until  the  corresponding  forms  of 
trimeter  verse  have  been  examined. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

TRIMETER  VERSE. 

203.  Almost  two-thirds  of  the  Rigveda  is  composed  in 
trimeter  verse,  the  number  of  verses  being  nearly  24,000.  The 
main  features  of  the  verse  are  the  same  throughout  the  Rigveda  : 
differences  of  structure,  though  clearly  marked,  are  concerned  with 
points  of  secondary  importance. 

For  historical  investigation  trimeter  verse  offers  a  much  richer 
field  than  dimeter  verse.  The  greater  amount  of  material,  the 
variety  of  the  internal  structure,  and  the  absence  of  sharply 
contrasted  types,  all  combine  to  make  it  easy  to  trace  the  steady 
developement  of  the  rhythm.  To  these  advantages  another  is 
added,  which  is  perhaps  the  most  important  of  all,  namely  that 
the  Samhita  text  provides  us  with  a  series  of  collections,  within 
each  of  which  the  rhythm  is  almost  absolutely  uniform.  Nearly 
all  the  'homogeneous  groups'  defined  in  §  91  contain  sufficient 
trimeter  verse  to  establish  their  respective  rhythmical  laws ;  and 
such  groups  as  i  31-35,  74-93,  94-115,  165-190,  and  Mandalas  iii, 
iv,  vi  and  vii  can  be  used  almost  as  they  stand  in  the  Rigveda 
as  units  of  investigation. 

In  this  field,  if  anywhere,  the  test  suggested  in  §  113  may  be 
applied.  The  '  homogeneous  groups '  as  finally  defined  in  Ch.  Ill 
are  revised  and  ordered  in  accordance  with  certain  striking 
metrical  peculiarities,  chiefly  concerned  with  their  external  form. 
If  it  appears  that  there  is  a  corresponding  developement  in  a 
number  of  other  metrical  features  which  have  not  yet  been  taken 
into  account,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  we  are  within  sight 
of  the  true  history  of  Vedic  metre. 

Besides  historical  developement  there  are  two  other  possible 
explanations  of  metrical  variations ;  the  individual  taste  of  the 
poet,  and  chance. 


176  History  and  chance 

Between  the  historical  developement  of  the  metre  and  the 
individual  taste  of  the  poets  no  sharp  line  of  distinction  can  be 
drawn:  the  history  of  the  Vedic  periods  is  in  the  last  analysis 
the  history  of  the  hymn-writers  who  belong  to  each  of  them. 
But  for  practical  purposes  individual  taste  is  characterized  by 
comparatively  abrupt  variation.  If  particular  features  are  found 
in  one  group  of  hymns  for  which  we  are  not  prepared  by  the 
groups  which  just  precede  it  in  time,  and  of  wrhich  hardly  any 
trace  is  left  in  groups  that  appear  immediately  to  succeed  it,  it 
is  a  natural  explanation  that  these  variations  represent  the  bias 
of  a  single  poet,  or  perhaps  of  a  small  group  of  poets  intimately 
associated  in  their  work.  This  individuality  has  often  been 
recognized  in  the  subject-matter  and  general  treatment  of  the 
seventh  Mandala,  with  the  result  that  the  family  name  Vasistha, 
alone  amongst  those  of  the  ancient  seers  of  Indian  tradition, 
suggests  to  many  Western  critics  also  a  striking  personality. 
It  will  appear  that  the  metre  of  this  collection  lends  some  support 
to  this  view. 

Variations  on  a  small  scale  may  be  ascribed  to  chance,  that 
is  to  say,  to  causes  which  are  not  directly  connected  with  the 
sense  of  rhythm.  In  a  large  body  of  verse  such  chance  variations 
will  take  place  in  every  possible  direction,  and  therefore  they  will 
have  no  perceptible  effect  upon  the  rhythm  as  expressed  in 
averages.  Chance,  though  it  laughs  at  all  other  laws,  is  always 
subject  to  its  own  law,  which  compels  it  to  neutralize  or  destroy 
its  own  creations :  and  this  principle  is  just  as  clearly  indicated 
in  the  rhythm  of  Vedic  hymns  as  at  the  gaming  tables  of  Monte 
Carlo.  If  a  ball  is  thrown  at  hap-hazard  on  a  table  on  which 
exactly  half  of  the  compartments  are  red  and  half  are  black, 
then  in  1000  consecutive  throws  the  ball  must  fall  very  nearly 
500  times  into  a  red  compartment.  If  a  Vedic  poet  is  really 
indifferent  to  the  quantity  of  a  particular  syllable,  then  in  1000 
of  his  verses  the  syllable  is  sure  to  be  short  in  just  about  500. 
Conversely  if  there  is  a  decided  balance  in  favour  of  the  long 
or  the  short  quantity,  there  must  be  a  metrical  motive  somewhere 
at  work. 

As  however  the  number  of  chances  is  decreased,  this  certainty 
is  diminished.  In  a  short  Vedic  hymn,  for  instance,  containing 
some  20  verses  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  initial  syllable  should 
be  twice  as  often  long  as  short.     Such  cases  however  will   not 


Parts  of  trimeter  verse  177 

often  be  found :  and  any  theory  that  might  be  built  upon  them 
would  soon  be  abandoned  as  the  result  of  further  enquiry.  In 
the  present  chapter  (as  indeed  in  those  that  have  preceded  it) 
we  shall  find  it  from  time  to  time  necessary  to  deal  with  small 
quantities  of  matter,  in  which  the  variations  that  occur  may  quite 
possibly  be  due  to  chance.  But  the  uncertainties  of  the  particular 
case  do  not  produce  a  like  uncertainty  in  the  general  conclusions 
to  which  we  are  led.  If  the  survey  of  the  facts  be  on  the  whole 
sufficiently  wide,  the  errors  in  detail  must  necessarily  be  relatively 
unimportant. 

The  habit  of  ascribing  the  metrical  variations  of  the  Rigveda 
to  chance  is  the  necessary  result  of  imperfect  familiarity  with  the 
details.  The  critic  of  metre  who  has  convinced  himself  that  chance 
is  a  totally  inadequate  explanation  of  the  facts  presented  to  him 
will  feel  bound  to  look  for  some  other  cause  or  causes.  And  since 
the  phonetic  structure  of  the  Vedic  dialect  is  obviously  pliable 
in  the  extreme  to  the  hand  of  the  poet,  he  will  necessarily  fall 
back  upon  the  conclusion  that  the  variations  which  occur  are  due 
to  changes  of  metrical  taste :  and  whether  these  changes  are 
conscious  or  unconscious,  the  product  of  the  time  or  of  the 
individual,  they  belong  in  a  broad  sense  to  the  region  of  historical 
investigation. 

204.  The  general  structure  of  trimeter  verse  has  already  been 
explained  in  §§  18-35,  42-56 ;  its  distribution  amongst  the 
'homogeneous  groups'  is  shewn  in  §  114.  As  with  dimeter  verse 
in  §  183,  so  now  we  begin  a  more  minute  study  of  trimeter  verse 
by  a  general  sketch  of  its  most  important  features,  and  by  giving 
in  figures  a  precise  measurement  of  the  part  filled  by  each  in  a 
series  of  groups,  corresponding  generally  to  the  'homogeneous 
groups'  of  §  91,  but  so  selected  as  to  represent  those  parts  of  the 
Rigveda  of  which  the  homogeneous  character  is  most  assured. 

The  questions  to  be  investigated  fall  naturally  under  the 
following  headings:  (i)  the  caesura,  (ii)  the  rhythm  of  the 
'opening,'  (iii)  the  'break,'  or  rhythm  of  the  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh 
syllables,  (iv)  the  cadence,  and  (v)  variations  in  the  number  of 
syllables,  so  far  as  they  are  not  included  under  the  preceding 
headings. 

The  groups  investigated  are  the  following:  in  the  archaic 
period  (i)  the  lyric  hymns,  and  (ii)  the  Tristubh  hymns  of 
a.  12 


178  Typical  trimeter  groups 

Bharadvaja  (Mandala  vi);  in  the  strophic  period  (iii)  the  Tristubh 
hymns  of  Vasistha  (Mandala  vii) ;  in  the  normal  period  (iv)  the 
hymns  of  Vamadeva  (Mandala  iv),  and  (v)  those  of  Kusika 
(Mandala  iii),  in  each  of  which  groups  the  Tristubh  metre 
prevails,  but  a  few  Jagati  hymns  are  also  found ;  and  in  the 
cretic  period  the  hymns,  almost  equally  divided  between  Tristubh 
and  Jagati  metre,  (vi)  of  Kutsa  (i  94-115),  and  (vii)  of  the  small 
groups  of  hymns  extending  from  x  29  to  x  80.  In  the  eighth 
and  last  group  are  included  all  the  hymns  of  the  popular 
Rigveda. 

The  statistical  results  for  these  eight  groups  are  given  in  the 
Table  in  §  212,  and  are  the  basis  of  the  discussion  in  the  sections 
that  now  follow. 

(i)  Although  the  general  type  of  trimeter  verse  is  on  the  whole 
the  same  throughout  the  Rigveda,  it  is  necessary  to  exclude  wholly  or 
partly  from  consideration  here  certain  hymns  which  have  a  very 
distinctive  character. 

Many  verses  which  are  treated  by  the  native  authorities  as  of  the 
trimeter  type  have  already  been  analyzed  as  consisting  of  dimeter 
verses  with  verses  of  four  (or  three)  syllables  attached.  This  is  par- 
ticularly the  case  in  the  metre  to  which  the  name  of  '  Dimeter  TJsnih ' 
(§  192)  has  been  given  in  this  book.  Verses  of  this  type  are  entirely 
excluded  from  consideration  here. 

Hymns  in  the  j  uneven  lyric  metres '  (§27)  form  a  special  class  so 
far  as  the  number  of  syllables  in  the  cadence  is  concerned.  Other 
variations  which  they  contain  are  included  in  this  chapter. 

Hymns  which  contain  'decasyllabic  variations'  (§§  49-53)  in  any 
large  proportion  fall  into  two  classes,  which  it  now  becomes  important 
to  distinguish. 

The  first  class  consists  of  hymns  in  which  different  decasyllabic 
variations  are  found,  in  proportions  varying  from  one  verse  in  ten  to 
one  verse  in  five.  These  we  now  name  as  a  class  hymns  in  decasyllabic 
Tristubh  metre,  though  in  fact  two  or  three  of  them  are  in  Jagati 
metre,  and  in  these  the  verses  which  contain  '  rests '  are  of  eleven 
syllables.  These  hymns  are  treated  separately  so  far  as  the  deca- 
syllabic variations  are  concerned :  but  other  variations  are  included 
throughout  the  chapter.     The  list  of  these  hymns  is  given  in  §  94  iii  a. 

The  second  class  consists  of  hymns  in  each  of  which  some  decasyllabic 
variation  is  predominant,  although  some  of  them  contain  many  verses  in 
Tristubh  or  Jagati.  These  we  now  name  hymns  in  decasyllabic  metres, 
with  the  same  qualification  as  in  the  last  section.  Variations  of  all 
kinds  occurring  in  these  hymns  are  given  in  the  lists  in  this  chapter 
within  square  brackets  or  in  special  subsections,  but  are  entirely 
excluded  from  the  tables.  The  hymns  here  referred  to  are  i  61,  65-70; 
ii  11 ;  iv  10  ;  vi  44  7-9 ;  vii  34  i-m,  56  i-n  ;  ix  109 ;  x  1,  6,  46,  77 
1-5,  78  i-6  (§  94  iii  b  c  d). 

The  special  features  which  occur  in  the  uneven  lyric  hymns  and  in 


The  caesura  179 

decasyllabic  hymns  of  the  two  classes  will  therefore  be  discussed  in 
this  chapter  primarily  from  the  standpoint  of  their  occurrence  as 
occasional  variations  in  other  hymns.  The  hymns  in  decasyllabic 
Tristubh  will  also  be  considered  in  this  chapter  as  a  special  class :  but 
the  consideration  of  the  hymns  in  uneven  lyric  metres  and  in  deca- 
syllabic metres,  so  far  as  their  respective  characteristic  features  are 
concerned,  will  be  postponed  to  the  next  chapter. 

(ii)  The  complete  investigation  of  trimeter  rhythm  involves  the 
tabulation  of  the  quantity  of  almost  every  syllable  in  the  trimeter 
verses  of  the  Rigveda,  in  connexion  with  the  position  of  the  caesura  in 
each  case.  In  the  following  points  only  it  has  seemed  sufficient  to 
take  samples  of  the  rhythm  :  (a)  for  the  initial  syllable ;  (b)  for  the 
1  regular '  forms  of  the  opening  (§  215);  (c)  for  the  occurrences  of  a 
natural  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable.  As  in  dimeter  verse,  we  have 
no  means  of  determining  with  completeness  the  quantity  of  final 
syllables,  but  feel  justified  in  assuming  that  it  is  metrically  indifferent. 

Where  samples  only  have  been  taken  of  the  quantity  in  any 
particular  position,  it  has  seemed  desirable  to  examine  not  less  than 
500  verses  in  each  case. 

205.  The  caesura  is  the  dominant  feature  of  trimeter  verse, 
and  its  position  decisively  affects  the  rhythm  both  of  the  opening 
and  of  the  break.  The  caesura  is  a  natural  pause,  corresponding 
to  the  taking  of  the  breath  in  recitation,  and  occurs  regularly 
in  all  parts  of  the  Rigveda  either  as  an  early  caesura,  that  is,  a 
pause  after  the  fourth  syllable,  or  as  a  late  caesura,  that  is,  a  pause 
after  the  fifth  syllable  (§  43).  Verses  of  these  two  types  are 
everywhere  combined  in  the  same  stanza. 

The  position  of  the  caesura  is  in  itself  indifferent  in  all  parts 
of  the  Rigveda :  but  indirectly  one  or  the  other  position  may  be 
slightly  favoured  on  account  of  some  rhythm  of  the  break  which 
depends  upon  it.  Thus  in  the  Vasistha  hymns  the  caesura  is 
more  often  late,  on  account  of  the  favour  shewn  to  the  break 
J  I,  -  ^  in  connexion  with  '  secondary  caesura '  (see  below) :  and 
in  the  Visvamitra  hymns  and  the  later  periods  the  caesura  is  more 
often  early,  on  account  of  the  favour  shewn  to  the  cretic  break 
,,---(§207). 

In  a  few  cases,  chiefly  in  the  archaic  period  or  in  the  popular 
Rigveda,  there  is  some  difficulty  in  determining  the  position  of 
the  caesura.  In  'decasyllabic'  and  'hybrid'  verses  there  is  always 
a  well-marked  caesura,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  say  in  each  case 
whether  it  should  be  considered  'early'  or  'late':  these  verses  are 
further  considered  in  §§  225-230.  Elsewhere  we  appear  to  find 
a  weak  caesura,  namely  either  (i)  a  caesura  dividing  the  two  parts 

12—2 


180  'Secondary  caesura1 

of  a  compound,  or  (ii)  a  caesura  following  the  third  syllable. 
Both  forms  of  the  weak  caesura  are  characteristic  of  the  archaic 
period,  and  are  further  considered  in  §  214. 

Chiefly  in  the  Vasistha  hymns  we  find  a  variation  which  we 
may  term  the  secondary  caesura,  being  an  approximation  of  the 
first  eight  syllables  of  trimeter  verse  to  the  dimeter  type. 

The  existence  of  the  'secondary  caesura'  in  the  Vasistha 
hymns  may  be  inferred  from  the  following  considerations : 

(i)  In  all  other  parts  of  the  Bigveda  a  pause  is  found  after 
the  8th  syllable  in  about  35  per  cent,  of  the  verses,  which  is  just 
the  proportion  that  might  be  expected  if  no  special  rhythm  were 
aimed  at.  But  in  the  Vasistha  hymns  this  pause  occurs  in  no 
less  than  57  per  cent,  of  the  verses. 

(ii)  Certain  other  variations  of  rhythm,  namely  the  caesura 
after  the  third  place,  and  the  breaks  n  w  -  **,  v  |(  —  ^;  and  -  jj  -^ 
are  found  very  much  more  frequently  when  there  is  a  pause  after 
the  eighth  syllable  than  elsewhere. 

The  verses  in  the  Vasistha  group  which  combine  one  of  the 
features  last  mentioned  with  a  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable 
amount  to  about  one-sixth  of  all  the  verses  in  these  hymns, 
and  roughly  account  for  the  higher  proportion  of  each  of  the 
separate  variations  in  these  hymns.  It  therefore  appears  that 
it  is  the  combination  of  the  pause  with  some  other  feature 
which  characterizes  this  collection,  and  in  the  Table  in  §  212 
the  instances  in  which  the  combination  occurs  are  considered 
separately. 

(i)  The  caesura  is  usually  a  pause  in  the  sense  as  well  as  in  the 
sound.  It  is  not  however  absolutely  necessary  that  this  should  be  so : 
and  we  find  numerous  examples  in  the  Bigveda  in  which  the  caesura 
separates  either  (a)  the  two  parts  of  a  dvandva  dual,  or  (b)  an  accented 
word  from  an  enclitic  which  follows  it,  or  (c)  the  negative  particle  or 
the  augment  a-,  when  combined  by  Sandhi  with  a  word  preceding, 
from  the  remainder  of  the  word  to  which  either  of  them  belongs.  As 
these  occurrences  seem  to  have  no  historical  importance,  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  give  a  few  examples  here  :  namely 

(a)  asmd  indra  \\  -varund  visvdvdram  vii  84  4a 

(b)  hdstesu  khadis  \\  ca  krtis  ca  sdm  dadhe  i  168  3d 
dgne  tokdsya  \\  nas  tdne  tanundm                   ii  9  2c 
asm  ad  pari  u  vdm  isah  purucih                     iii  58  8a 

(c)  sdm  vatsend  \\  -srjatd  mdtdram  punah  i  110  8b 
durvasase  \\  -mataye  md  no  asyai                  vii  1    19b. 


Examples  of  secondary  caesura  181 

Further  examples  of  (c)  are  found  in  i  59  2c,  168  9c,  190  3d  • 
ii35  13a;  ivll2d;  v  11  3c;  vii  61  3d;  x  61  7c,  68  10b 
89  13d,  99  5d,  *103  lc  *2a. 

(ii)  That  the  syllable  before  the  caesura,  like  the  final  syllable  of 
the  verse,  is  indifferent  in  quantity  (syllaba  anceps)  is  a  theory  as  old 
as  the  Samhita  text  itself,  and  finds  expression  in  the  systematic 
neglect  to  record  the  long  vowels  of  certain  endings  in  the  position  4A 
(see  especially  §  176  ii).  Western  critics  have  also  often  inclined  to 
this  view.  There  is  however  no  foundation  for  it  in  the  usage  of  the 
poets :  indeed  the  quantity  of  the  fourth  syllable  is  more  strictly 
regulated  in  trimeter  verse  when  the  caesura  follows  than  in  dimeter 
verse  where  there  is  no  caesura :  and  the  quantity  of  the  fifth  syllable 
where  the  caesura  follows  is  better  marked  than  that  of  the  third  in 
the  same  verses,  as  appears  from  the  Table  (§  212). 

(iii)  Of  the  forms  of  the  secondary  caesura  by  far  the  most 
common  is  that  which  employs  the  break  s-»  »  —  v,  and  it  is  illustrated 
by  the  following  examples  : 

somah  sukro  nd  \\  vaydva  |  ay  ami     vii  64  5b 
vdsistha  sukra  \\  didivah  (  pdvaka      vii  1   8b, 

the  first  example  having  in  addition  a  short  eighth  syllable. 

Verses  of  this  type  amount  to  one-tenth  of  the  whole  number 
occurring  in  the  Vasistha  group,  and  are  more  than  twice  as  common 
there  as  in  the  Bigveda  generally:  they  may  therefore  be  appropri- 
ately termed  Vasisthi  verses. 

The  frequency  of  verses  of  this  type  in  the  Vasistha  group 
sufficiently  accounts  for  the  preference  shewn  to  a  late  caesura. 

(iv)  The  less  important  forms  of  the  secondary  caesura  may  be 
illustrated  as  follows : 

(a)  caesura  after  third  syllable  with  pause  after  the  eighth : 

d  citra  ||  citriam  bhara  (  rayim  nah     vii  20  7d 

(b)  iambic  break  u  ^  -  ^  with  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable : 

prd  dhenava  u  udapruto  (  navanta         vii  42   lc 

(c)  iambic  break  -  jj  -  v  with  the  same  pause  : 

dtutujim  cit  ^  tutujir  I  asisnat  vii  28  3d. 

(v)  '  Verses  with  secondary  caesura '  as  now  defined  appear  to  be 
distinctly  influenced  by  dimeter  rhythm,  yet  they  are  by  no  means  in 
entire  agreement  with  it. 

Of  our  verses  (Table,  §  212)  5  per  cent,  have  caesura  after  the  third 
syllable,  23  per  cent,  after  the  fourth,  and  72  per  cent,  after  the  fifth. 
Of  100  dimeter  verses  measured  in  the  same  way  the  proportions  are 
22,  32  and  39  respectively,  whilst  8  verses  have  no  break  (except 
within  a  compound)  in  any  of  these  positions. 

Of  the  verses  which  have  one  or  other  form  of  iambic  break  only 
12  per  cent,  have  a  short  eighth  syllable.  Although  this  proportion  is 
very  much  higher  than  that  usually  found  in  trimeter  verse,  it  is  very 


182  Rhythm  of  the  opening 

much  lower  than  that  found  in  dimeter  verse,  in  which  the  quantity  of 
the  eighth  syllable  is  of  course  indifferent. 

Again  in  our  instances  the  fifth  syllable  is  long  (as  in  the  last 
example)  in  one-tenth  of  the  verses,  whereas  in  dimeter  verse  a  long 
fifth  syllable  is  seldom  found  more  often  than  once  in  a  hundred  verses. 

We  seem  therefore  to  be  precluded  from  using  the  convenient  title 
1  dimeter  Tristubh '  for  these  verses,  although  it  is  very  suggestive  of 
their  general  character.  Neither  are  we  in  a  position  to  assert 
definitely  that  this  type  is  derived  by  contamination  from  dimeter 
verse  :  it  is  quite  possible  that  its  leading  variety  v^  n  -  ^  was  directly 
derived  from  the  more  usual  form  ^  n  ^  ^  (which  is  only  equally 
common  in  these  hymns)  in  an  endeavour  to  introduce  a  more  varied 
rhythm  (see  §  207  iv). 

In  any  case  it  does  not  seem  probable  that  these  verses  represent  a 
primitive  type :  for  in  that  case  we  should  expect  to  find  them  accom- 
panied by  the  general  freedom  of  metre  which  characterizes  the  archaic 
period  :  whereas  in  fact  the  Vasistha  hymns  are  on  the  whole  quite  as 
regular  as  (say)  those  of  Vamadeva. 


206.  In  the  opening  a  general  iambic  rhythm  predominates 
under  all  circumstances,  as  in  dimeter  verse :  but  the  develope- 
ment  of  this  rhythm  is  not  only  different  from  that  found  in 
dimeter  verse,  but  also  varies  according  to  the  position  of  the 
caesura. 

If  the  caesura  is  early,  about  two-thirds  of  the  openings  in 
every  group  fall  within  the  formula  *  —  *,-:  if  it  is  late,  the 
proportion  is  always  as  high  as  three-fourths,  and  in  the  Visva- 
mitra  group  it  is  much  higher. 

Before  an  early  caesura  the  quantity  of  the  third  syllable  is 
usually  indifferent :  in  the  groups  of  the  normal  period  a  short 
vowel  is  preferred,  in  the  Kutsa  hymns  a  long  vowel. 

If  the  caesura  is  late  the  four  regular  forms  are  used  almost 
indifferently  in  the  archaic  and  even  in  the  strophic  period :  but 
later  there  is  a  marked  preference  for  a  short  third  and  a  long 
fifth  syllable,  giving  a  normal  form  --  ^  — t  which  is  identical 
with  the  usual  form  of  the  Pentad  in  Dvipada  Viraj  verse,  and 
may  therefore  be  called  the  Pentad  opening. 

The  syncopated  form  -  ^ ,|  is  fairly  common  in  the  lyric 

hymns  of  the  archaic  period,  and  still  more  in  the  cretic  and 
popular  periods :  but  it  has  no  such  developement  as  occurs  in 
dimeter  verse. 

The  other  variations  of  the  opening  are  of  very  little  historical 
importance:  they  are  discussed  in  §  215. 


Rhythm  of  the  break  183 

In  the  following  stanza  all  the  verses  except  the  first  have  the 
'  Pentad  opening ' : 

indrd  yuvdm  (|  varund  didyUm  asmin 

6jistham  ugrd  n  ni  vadhistam  vdjram 

yb  no  durevo  \\  vrkdtAr  dabhitih 

tdsmin  mimdthdm  \\  abhibhuti  bjah  iv  41   4. 

As  however  the  construction  of  stanzas  in  which  all  the  verses  have 
either  early  or  late  caesura  is  foreign  to  the  metrical  conceptions  of  the 
Rigveda,  stanzas  of  this  type  are  only  found  here  and  there  as  chance 
productions.     See  further  §  207  ii. 


207.  The  rhythm  of  the  break  depends  directly  upon  the 
caesura,  and  is  much  more  varied  when  the  caesura  is  early  than 
otherwise :  this,  as  has  before  been  observed,  is  also  the  case  with 
the  opening. 

The  normal  forms  are  |jww-  when  the  caesura  is  early,  and 
- 1|  ^  ^  when  the  caesura  is  late  :  each  of  them  includes  about 
40  per  cent,  of  the  occurrences  in  the  archaic  period,  and  an 
increasing  proportion  in  the  later  periods. 

The  subnormal  forms  after  an  early  caesura  are  ||—  v  —,  r  w  v  w, 
II  -  ^  ^  ;  that  is,  the  remaining  possible  forms  with  short  sixth 
syllable.  Of  these  the  ere  tic  break  fl  —  —  —  is  found  in  about  one- 
seventh  of  the  instances  in  the  earlier  groups :  but  in  the  hymns 
of  Visvamitra  and  of  the  later  periods  it  is  about  twice  as  common. 
Occurrences  of  forms  with  short  seventh  syllable  are  about  one- 
third  as  frequent  in  every  period  as  the  corresponding  forms  in 
which  that  syllable  is  long.  With  a  late  caesura  the  only  ■  sub- 
normal' form  is  ^  I,  ^  ^  :  in  the  archaic  period  this  is  almost  as 
common  as  the  normal  form,  but  in  the  later  periods  it  is  only 
half  as  common. 

The  iambic  forms  |,  w.  —  w,  ^  jj  -  w,  -  jj — w  may  all  be  con- 
sidered as  occasional  forms,  at  least  in  the  archaic  period.  The 
form  s/  „  -  v  becomes  rather  more  common  in  the  strophic  period, 
and  retains  a  certain  importance  in  the  later  groups :  but  the  two 
remaining  forms  decrease  rapidly  in  frequency.  The  occurrence 
of  these  forms  in  connexion  with  '  secondary  caesura '  has  already 
been  discussed  in  §  205. 

The  remaining  forms  may  be  considered  as  irregular.  They 
are  all  relatively  common  in  the  archaic  period,  and  rare 
afterwards. 


184  Rhythm  of  the  break 

(i)  The  rule  given  in  §  45,  that  the  caesura  should  be  followed  by 
two  short  syllables,  holds  good  for  about  two-thirds  of  all  the  trimeter 
verses  in  the  Rigveda,  but  is  largely  qualified  by  the  particulars  now 
given.  Thus  after  an  early  caesura  the  cretic  form  |j  —  ^  —  is  much 
more  common  than  the  form  |v;ww,  and  must  be  considered  as  a 
more  regular  form  :  and  the  form  § —  **.  w  seems  also  to  rank  as  regular 
in  the  cretic  and  popular  periods.  In  other  particulars  also  the 
classification  of  the  forms  does  not  apply  with  equal  force  to  all 
periods ;  for  instance,  the  iambic  forms  (except  ^  u  -  ^)  are  really 
irregular  after  the  strophic  period. 

(ii)  With  a  late  caesura  both  the  opening  and  the  break  are 
comparatively  inelastic  in  rhythm :  hence,  as  the  examples  quoted 
above  (§  206)  shew,  the  trimeter  rhythm  tends  towards  an  absolutely 
rigid  scheme,  viz. 


\j  —  \j  — 


The  Indian  theory  of  classical  Sanskrit  metre  unnecessarily  dis- 
tinguishes two  forms  of  this  verse,  according  to  the  quantity  of  the 
initial  syllable :  and  it  fails  to  take  adequate  account  of  the  caesura, 
which  is  the  most  important  feature  in  the  verse,  at  any  rate  as  used 
in  the  Rigveda.  Still  the  term  Indravajra  will  be  convenient  for  the 
scheme  just  given,  if  we  may  modify  the  traditional  meaning  by 
regarding  the  quantity  of  the  initial  syllable  as  indifferent,  and  the 
late  caesura  as  essential. 

Although  the  '  Indravajra '  verse  (illustrated  in  §  206)  never 
becomes  established  as  the  basis  of  an  independent  metre,  it  holds 
a  position  of  such  prominence  amongst  the  various  forms  of  Tristubh 
verse  that  it  may  fairly  be  considered  as  the  dominant  type  which  has 
emerged  from  the  competition  of  numerous  Vedic  rivals. 

(iii)  The  use  of  the  iambic  forms  y  w  —  w,  w  jj  -  v^,  and  that  of  the 
cretic  form  |(  —  w  -  present  the  most  striking  features  of  the  metre  of 
the  Rigveda.  At  first  sight  the  iambic  forms  appear  to  be  character- 
istic of  the  earlier  Vedic  periods,  and  the  cretic  form  seems  to  mark 
the  later :  and  this  general  view  was  assumed  as  a  starting-point  in 
§§  94  v,  95  ii.  It  is  now  seen  to  be  subject  to  important  qualifications. 
In  particular  the  form  ^  u  —  v/,  when  used  with  secondary  caesura, 
assumes  importance  even  in  some  of  the  later  periods,  and  in  the 
hymns  of  Visvamitra,  and  to  a  certain  extent  in  the  group  x  29-80,  is 
used  side  by  side  with  the  cretic  form. 

(iv)  Although  the  form  v  (|  w  v  is  a  regular  form  in  all  periods,  it 
is  comparatively  little  used  in  the  Vasistha  hymns,  where  it  is  actually 
less  common  than  the  form  v^  (|  -  v^.  There  is  therefore  ground  for 
thinking  that  the  latter  form  was  encouraged  by  some  distaste  for  the 
three  consecutive  short  syllables  at  the  break.  In  the  end  both  these 
forms  gave  way  to  the  dominant  type  -  n  v  v  It  has  been  necessary 
to  consider  the  quantity  of  the  fifth  syllable  in  connexion  with  the 
opening  also,  as  it  has  a  bearing  upon  the  quantity  of  the  fourth  :  but 
it  seems  that  even  with  a  late  caesura  the  quantity  of  the  fifth  syllable 
is  primarily  affected  by  the  syllables  that  follow. 


Rhythm  of  the  cadence  185 

(v)     Irregular   forms   of   the   break    are   much    commoner   if   the 

caesura  is  early  than  otherwise  :  the  most  common  form  is  n  ^ ,  and 

next  to  it  || v^.     After  a  late  caesura  *  "jj  w  —  is  more  common  than 

^n .     This  gradation  follows  naturally  from  the  rule  in  §  45  :  in 

both   types   of   the  verse  the  rarest  forms  of  the  break  are  those  in 
which  the  caesura  is  followed  by  two  long  syllables. 

208.  The  regular  rhythm  of  the  cadence  is  -  %/  -  *  in 
Tristubh  verses,  and  -  v  -  ^  -  in  JagatI  verses.  This  rhythm 
appears  to  be  almost  entirely  independent  of  the  caesura  and  the 
rhythm  of  the  break. 

In  the  eighth  place  a  short  syllable  is  employed  fairly  often, 
not  only  in  the  archaic  and  atrophic  periods,  but  also  in  the  hymns 
of  Vamadeva  in  the  normal  period  :  and  some  liberty  in  this 
direction  is  still  retained  even  in  the  later  periods. 

This  liberty  is,  however,  not  extended  equally  to  all  syllables. 
Final  syllables  are  found  twice  as  often  with  this  quantity  as 
initial  or  medial  syllables :  and  final  vowels  are  found  about  twice 
as  often  as  final  consonants. 

The  prevalence  of  short  final  syllables  in  this  position  in  the 
Vasistha  hymns  is  associated  with  the  secondary  caesura:  as 
becomes  clear  when  we  observe  that  almost  one-half  of  the  verses 
with  short  eighth  syllable  in  this  group  have  one  or  other  of  the 
iambic  breaks  u  v  -  w,  w ^— \*¥  —  ,j  -  v.  The  preference  given  to 
final  short  vowels  as  compared  with  final  syllables  ending  in 
consonants  calls  for  some  different  explanation :  the  phenomenon 
is  clearly  analogous  with  the  similar  preference  for  final  short 
vowels  in  the  second  place,  and  the  two  are  discussed  together  in 
§§  221,  222. 

The  short  tenth  syllable  is  about  half  as  common  as  the  short 
eighth  syllable,  and  is  almost  always  an  initial  or  medial  syllable, 
as  is  also  the  short  sixth  syllable  in  dimeter  verse.  This  fact 
shews  that  there  is  some  arbitrary  or  conventional  element 
associated  with  the  opposite  tendency  shewn  in  the  short  eighth 
syllable. 

The  short  eighth  and  the  short  tenth  syllable  are  associated  in  the 
same  verse  just  as  often  as  might  be  expected  by  the  laws  of  chance, 
and  are  therefore  tabulated  quite  independently :  all  other  quantitative 
variations  in  the  cadence  are  very  rare,  and  are  almost  confined  to  the 
archaic  period. 

209.  There   are   some   important   syllabic   variations   which 


186  Syllabic  variations 

affect  the  cadence  only.  These  are  (i)  the  catalectic  Jagati  verse, 
in  which  the  Tristubh  cadence  is  found  in  a  lyric  or  Jagati  stanza; 
(ii)  the  extended  Tristubh  verse,  in  which  the  Jagati  cadence  is 
found  in  a  Tristubh  stanza;  and  (iii)  the  hyper  syllabic  verse,  in 
.which  the  Tristubh  or  Jagati  cadence  is  extended  by  two  syllables. 

The  first  two  variations  may  be  explained  by  '  contamination ' 
(§§  55,  56):  'catalectic  Jagati'  is  not  uncommon  in  the  archaic 
and  cretic  periods,  and  becomes  frequent  in  the  popular  Rigveda ; 
whilst  'extended  Tristubh'  is  very  rare  except  in  the  popular 
Rigveda. 

'Hypersyllabic  verses'  constitute  a  special  metrical  develope- 
ment,  as  is  clear  from  the  great  number  of  such  verses  found  in  a 
single  hymn  (viii  97  10-15).  The  occurrences  are  confined  to 
the  archaic  period. 

These  variations  are  further  discussed  in  §§  223,  224. 

210.  The  syllabic  variations  which  affect  the  verse  as  a  whole 
are  those  exhibited  in  'decasyllabic  verses'  (§  49)  and  'hybrid 
verses'  (§  56).  Of  decasyllabic  verses  there  are  many  varieties 
(§§  226-228),  several  of  which  develope  into  the  distinct  metres 
found  in  the  decasyllabic  hymns.  For  the  moment  we  put  aside 
not  only  these  verses,  but  also  all  those  that  occur  in  the  hymns 
in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  metre  (§  204  i),  and  consider  only  those 
verses  which  occur  sporadically :  the  Table  shews  that  these  are 
relatively  common  in  the  archaic  period,  and  are  occasionally 
found  in  all  the  groups  except  those  of  Visvamitra  and  Kutsa. 

The  conclusion  reached  above  (§  149  i),  that  most  of  the 
verses  in  which  some  part  of  the  word  indra  follows  an  early 
caesura  are  to  be  interpreted  as  decasyllabic,  now  finds  support 
in  considerations  of  rhythm.  For  in  such  verses  the  final  syllable 
of  the  word  is  short  in  two  instances  out  of  every  three,  as  is 
regularly  the  case  in  decasyllabic  verses  of  the  corresponding  type 
(§  226  i,  ii)  :  whereas  if  the  resolved  value  were  correct  we  should 
expect  to  find  the  rhythm  ,|  -  ^  -  quite  twice  as  often  as  (j  -  ^  ^. 
These  verses  are  therefore  included  with  the  decasyllabic  verses  in 
the  Table. 

Hybrid  verses  are  occasionally  found  both  in  the  lyric  hymns 
of  the  archaic  period,  and  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

In  Chapters  IV  and  VI  I  have  preferred  to  interpret  verses  either 
by  hiatus  or  by  syllabic  resolution,  rather  than  as  decasyllabic  verses, 


Developement  of  trimeter  rhythm  187 

whenever  the  evidence  appeared  in  any  way  adequate.  In  so  doing  I 
have  followed  a  principle  which  commends  itself  by  its  simplicity  both 
to  Indian  and  to  western  critics  of  the  Rigveda:  but  the  present 
enquiry  rather  points  to  the  conclusion  that  decasyllabic  variations 
should  be  more  freely  recognized.  The  evidence  of  early  date  is  very 
much  the  same,  whichever  be  the  explanation  favoured  in  particular 
instances. 

211.  In  the  general  picture  of  the  developement  of  trimeter 
rhythm  which  is  shewn  by  the  Table  in  the  next  section  there 
appears  a  broad  contrast  between  the  groups  of  the  archaic  period 
and  those  that  are  subsequent  to  them.  In  the  archaic  period 
almost  every  variation  is  relatively  common,  so  that  it  would 
seem  that  the  trimeter  rhythm  was  not  at  that  time  established 
in  any  very  strict  form.  But  in  all  the  subsequent  periods  we 
find  very  general  regularity,  with  special  favour  shewn  to  one  or 
more  forms,  such  as  the  'secondary  caesura/  the  'pentad  opening,' 
and  'the  cretic  break,'  which  are  nevertheless  common  in  all 
periods.  In  the  popular  Rigveda  the  variations  are  all  such  as 
may  be  explained  by  the  '  contamination '  of  verses  or  parts  of 
verses  of  different  types. 

The  variations  which  characterize  the  archaic  period  are  both 
numerous  and  distinctive :  they  are  also  generally  similar  to  those 
which  characterize  the  same  period  in  dimeter  verse.  Hence  we 
can  readily  detect  the  archaic  rhythm,  even  in  a  small  group  or  a 
single  hymn.  The  characteristics  of  the  strophic,  normal,  and 
cretic  periods,  on  the  other  hand,  can  only  be  observed  in  large 
bodies  of  verse  :  in  small  groups  and  single  hymns  the  favoured 
types  of  these  periods  may  happen  to  predominate  merely  as  the 
result  of  chance. 

The  frequency  of  'contamination'  in  the  popular  Rigveda  has 
already  been  used  as  evidence  of  date  in  Chapter  II :  in  other 
points  the  metre  of  that  period  is  in  close  agreement  with  that 
of  the  cretic  period.  On  the  other  hand  the  provisional  theory 
of  an  'archaic  period'  receives  confirmation  from  the  appearance  of 
a  great  number  of  new  features  which  are  seen  to  characterize 
the  groups  assigned  to  this  period :  and  the  examination  of  these 
details  promises  to  supply  us  with  the  means  of  defining  with 
considerable  accuracy  the  list  of  hymns  which  should  be  assigned 
to  this  period.  For  the  intermediate  periods  we  can  only  expect 
to  trace  the  history  in  its  broader  outlines. 


188 


Trimeter  rhythm 


212.     Table  shewing  the  principal  varieties  of  trimeter 

RHYTHM. 


Period 

Archaic 

Stroph. 

Normal 

Cretic 

Popular 

Lyric 

Bhar. 

Vas. 

Varna.  Visv. 

Kutsa 

x 29-80 

Group 

I 

Ill 

IV 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

No.  of  verses 

736 

1524 

1621 

1598 

1407 

685 

1155 

3445 

The  Caesura: 

Caesura  after  4th  syllable 

448 

468 

440 

496 

537 

582 

519 

519 

„        ^   „      5th       „ 

496 

478 

536 

480 

458 

410 

467 

463 

,,        in  compound 

8 

14 

6 

6 

3 

0 

2 

2 

,,        after  3rd  syllable1 

3 

5 

1 

3 

0 

0 

2 

0 

Secondary  caesura: 

with  caes.  after  3rd 

3 

1 

9 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

with  break,  n  ~ 

22 

13 

41 

5 

10 

3 

3 

3 

&gt;&gt;                ii 

40 

42 

107 

24 

61 

15 

34 

17 

—  ii  -  v 

5 

15 

18 

6 

7 

6 

7 

3 

The  Opening: 

(a)  with  early  caesura: 

Regular,         ==  -  ~  - 

130 

163 

157 

208 

220 

173 

177 

174 

II 

151 

143 

154 

161 

152 

235 

176 

172 

Syncopated,  -  ~ 

58 

40 

37 

35 

42 

68 

58 

63 

Other  forms 

109 

122 

92 

101 

123 

106 

108 

110 

(6)  with  late  caesura : 

Pentad,     -  -  ~ 

115 

91 

131 

182 

169 

139 

150 

132 

Regular,  -  -  ■ ~ 

113 

98 

128 

77 

105 

84 

69 

82 

M 

91 

94 

85 

85 

81 

58 

86 

98 

&gt;&gt; 

78 

79 

106 

75 

74 

48 

61 

61 

Other  forms 

99 

116 

86 

61 

29 

81 

101 

90 

The  Break: 

(a)  after  early  caesura: 

Normal,  h  ~  ~  - 

201 

206 

217 

233 

295 

286 

245 

270 

Cretic,      n  -  ~  - 

67 

72 

67 

77 

142 

170 

136 

119 

B     W    W    %tf 

60 

94 

65 

78 

57 

50 

80 

80 

II  —  s"  w 

19 

32 

34 

19 

20 

62 

46 

37 

Iambic,    „  ~  -  -1 

33 

14 

4 

5 

1 

0 

3 

1 

Irregular  forms 

49 

30 

9 

16 

6 

10 

7 

11 

(b)  with  late  caesura: 

Normal,     -  n  ~  ~ 

233 

221 

248 

285 

248 

232 

290 

279 

-'ii ' 

162 

167 

118 

145 

130 

137 

122 

153 

Iambic,      *-  n  —  wl 

28 

21 

31 

11 

10 

13 

10 

7 

„ 

13 

13 

9 

4 

1 

7 

3 

2 

Irregular,  -  „  -  - 

17 

5 

6 

3 

3 

0 

3 

2 

The  Cadence  : 

Short  eighth  syllable : 

,,      with  secondary  caesura 

3 

5 

19 

1 

4 

0 

0 

1 

,,      final  vowel 

30 

21 

15 

22 

7 

7 

2 

4 

,,      final  consonant 

18 

7 

11 

12 

9 

4 

3 

6 

„      otherwise 

24 

11 

2 

8 

3 

10 

3 

4 

Short  tenth 

34 

34 

5 

8 

2 

6 

3 

3 

Long  ninth 

8 

9 

5 

6 

1 

1 

3 

2 

Irregular 

4 

7 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

0 

Catalectic  JagatI 

23 

— 

— 

— 

— 

43 

44 

70 

Extended  Tristubh 

— 

1 

2 

1 

2 

2 

0 

45 

Hypersyllabic  verses 

7 

4 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Syllabic  variations: 

Decasyllabic  verses3 

21 

25 

14 

14 

4 

5 

11 

10 

Hybrid                 „ 

5 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

6 

All  the  figures  in  this  Table  are  proportional  to  each  1000  verses. 


The  'Vasisthi'  verse  189 

213.  In  order  to  apply  these  results  to  smaller  bodies  of 
verse,  it  will  be  necessary  to  record  more  precisely  the  occurrences 
of  those  variations  which  are  of  historic  importance.  Amongst 
these  the  'secondary  caesura,'  which  includes  phenomena  con- 
nected both  with  the  ordinary  caesura  and  with  the  break,  is 
the  first  to  claim  consideration. 

Apart  from  the  Vasistha  hymns,  these  variations  are  most 
common  in  the  archaic  period,  but  are  also  occasionally  used  later. 
But  the  '  Vasisthi  verse '  (§  205  iii)  is  very  common  in  some  of 
the  later  collections  also,  for  instance  in  the  Visvamitra  hymns 
and  the  collection  x  29-80  :  whereas  the  form  with  caesura  after 
the  third  syllable  is  hardly  found  later  than  the  strophic  period. 

(i)  The  Vasisthi  verse  occurs  so  frequently  that  it  will  be  suffi- 
cient to  give  the  references  to  the  hymns  only,  indicating  by  an  index 
number  the  number  of  occurrences  in  each  hymn;  reference  to  the 
verse  is  only  given  in  the  case  of  composite  hymns.  The  list  then  is  : 
i  *242  33  36  39  44  51  54  557  56  574  582  59*  [613]  632  71  72  73  772 
79  83  852  87*  883  89  (8b)  924  *932  100  102  103  1043  110  1113  1128  113 
1168  11720  1184  1192  1213  1222  125  1273  128  131  *133  (la  lb)  134  140 
1412  1443  1492  1512  152  1532  1542  1552  1563  *161  *1633  *164  165  1672 
1682  169  171  1735  175  *179  1803  1813  182  1832  1843  185;  ii  9  10 

[ll2]  122  14  17  192  21  23  24  273  282  29  30  312  *32  (5b)  335  352  36 
383  40;  iii  l5  22  4  5  62  73  146  15  18  192  20  21  222  25  26  *28  *294 
305  317  322  353  362  387  392  45  48  50  513  533  (9b  10b  *17b)  54  552  56* 
575  5810  59  612;  iv  22  32  47  55  62  [102]  12  *183  192  20  22  24  272  292 

34  37  38  39  42  43  44  45  50  51  *58 ;  v  l3  2  3  4  82  12  28  (lb)  302 
31  322  34  36  4l2  42  434  45  47  48  492  54  55  57  603  76  774  81  *83  87 ; 
vi  1  3  45  6  10  ll2  123  15  (15b)  16  (46b)  21  22  233  262  272  *28  30 
31  33  372  38  39  402  41  446  484  49  504  512  52  (14d)  60  622  633  642  65 
664  67  682  69  72 ;  vii  l5  22  37  48  6  74  85  102  13  143  172  183  193  205 
21  224  235  242  25  262  272  302  31  322  34  362  372  385  39  406  423  43  45 
566  [and  11a]  572  588  607  612  62  644  654  675  686  692  706  71  723  739  752 
772  842  85  864  873  882  90  924  95  977  99  100  *103  *1042;  viii  *1 
(34d)  4  15  18s  19  204  21  22  233  24  27  33  357  362  462  *486  49  53  57  60 
66  86  87  88  89  964  982  99  101 ;  ix  68  704  712  74  75  763  794  83  84 
853  863  883  892  91  93  952  96  97  (lid  21c)  106  107  108  [109];  x  [1] 
3  4  *103  *13  *14  *18  233  *27  29  30  31  322  (Id  2d)  353  362  382  392  402 
45  [462]  483  493  50  55  *59  6110  623  63  644  685  692  70  735  742  762  773 
(7b  8b)  78  (7b)  793  *82  *832.  89  91  922  93  *943  *954  993  104  105  106 
113  1157  116  *117  *1203  1234  124  *125  132  140  147  *168  172s  *179. 

[Notes  to  the  Table  opposite] 

1  For  occurrences  combined  with  a  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable  see  under 
'secondary  caesura.'  The  number  of  occurrences  under  the  two  headings  must 
be  added  together  to  give  the  whole  number  in  each  1000  verses. 

2  Vasisthi  verse  (§  213). 

3  Verses  occurring  in  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tnstubh  are  not  included  here. 


190  Other  forms  of  '  secondary  caesura' 

(ii)  The  following  are  instances  of  the  combination  of  a  caesura 
after  the  third  with  a  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable:  i  36  18a,  63  2c1, 
174  9d;  ii  14  4d2,   17  5d,  24   12c,   33  8c;  iii  16  6c,  58  7a; 

iv  33  10a2;  vi  15  12d,  48  17c3,  51  9b24;  vii  2  7c,  7  lb, 
20  7d,  26  5b,  36  5c,  57  6b,  60  la4,  67  5b,  68  3c,  88  3d,  97  3b  9a ; 

viii  25  23c;         ix  96  4b;  x  106  7a2  7d,  *120  9c,  132  2b, 

172  2b. 

1  caesura   following  the  prior  element   of  a  compound.  2  only  in   these 

instances  is  dimeter  rhythm  wanting.         3  §  151  i.         4  with  short  eighth  syllable. 

(iii)  In  the  following  instances  the  break  n  w  —  *»  is  combined 
with  a  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable:  i  *24  15b,  32  13a,  33  8a, 
44  10a,  55  4a,  57  4b,  58  9d,  60  5d,  71  4c1,  83  Id,  87  6b,  88  5d,  89  6d, 
*93  5d,  104  Id,  106  5b,  113  3c,  116  Id  7d,  117  6d  16b,  120  7c, 
121  13d2,  127  8a,  128  4a,  158  4b,  *164  13d,  166  14b,  180  8c,  190  4a; 

ii  9  3c3,  15  5b,  23  8a,  27  16a;  iii  1  17c,  14  6c  7a,  19  2a, 
25  5a,  26  3c  6a,  34  8a,  43  3a,  47  lb,  53  lib,  55  18a,  58  7b,  59  2c, 
61  2a;    iv  12  6b,  20  3b,  *24  9b,  26  5b,  37  3b,  50  3b  5a,  55  2ca; 

v  31  lid,  46  2d,  53  6a  7c  lib  14a,  87  lc  4c  8c;  vi  2  lie, 
15  10b  12a  15e,  17  Id  13c,  23  7d2,  26  3c  6c,  2(J  2b  2c,  30  4b,  49  4d, 
50  12a  14c,  51  9d,  63  2d  7c,  64  5a2,  67  2d,  73  2a2;  vii  1  3b  4c  5a 
6b  lib  15a  19a  20d,  3  9c  10b,  7  4b  7d,  14  3b,  18  7a  7b,  19  lc  4d  8c, 
20  4d  5d  7b  8a  9a,  21  8d,  22  2c,  23  3a,  25  fid4,  27  Id,  29  3a,  36  4c  9b, 
37  lb2  2b«  6c,  38  Id4  6a7  7b  7c,  39  2d  3c  7a,  40  lb2  3c,  42  lc,  56  14b  19c, 
58  5c,  60  6c  7b  12a,  61  4c,  67  5d,  68  3a  6b  8c2,  70  lb,  84  2b,  85  la  Id, 
86  4b2  6b2  6c2,  87  lb  5d,  92  3c  4d2.  95  2a  2b  4a  5b2  6a2,  97  2a2  2d  5d5, 
100  3b;    viii  15  2c,  17  15c,  18  19c2,  22  9b,  23  27c,  24  15c,  25  lie, 

27  10a,  36  lb  -  2b  =  3b,  46  28e,  60  4a,  70  7c,  80  lOd,  87  6a,  96  2c  17c, 
98  lc,  99  8a,  101  8a;  ix  74  4c,  79  3a  3b,  86  43a,  90  6d,  93  5d, 
97  3d  6d  54d8,  108  15b,  111  2a;  x  4  lc  2b,  *17  Id,  *18  12c, 
23  3a2,  30  2b,  48  7b,  61  20b,  65  lb  15d,  66  la1,  73  5a,  74  6c,  75  5c, 
*87  21d,  *95  7c,  96  5a,  99  la2  6a,  105  4b,  116  5c,  122  8d,  123  5d, 
126  8b,  140  6c,  160  5d6. 

1  §  151  iii.  2  also  short  eighth  syllable.  3  2  sing.  perf.  in  -thd  (~tha) 

in  eighth  place.  4  §  166  iv.  5  §  170  ii  c.  6  §  151  ii.  7  §  142  i. 

(iv)  The  break  —  u  —  w  is  combined  with  a  pause  after  the  eighth 
syllable  in  the  following  verses :  i  55  3d  6d,  56  3b,  57  4c  6b,  77  5c, 
89  5c,  100  4c  10b  15a,  113  13c,  116  21a,  117  3b  4c  7d  13b,  118  6d, 
121  11a,  122  3c  4b,  132  6a,  135  6a,  141  6c,  146  3c,  156  2b  3a  3c, 
158  2c  5c,  *164  29a  *52a,  167  5b,  173  lc1,  178  3c1,  186  3b  5a  11a, 
189  4a1,  190  3d2  4b;  ii  4  3d,  [11  10b  12d  21c],  14  8d,  17  lb  6c, 
20  4c1,  23  7a,  32  3b,  33  5d  12c,  35  9b  15a,  36  6a;  iii  4  4b,  5  2a, 
7  lOd,  15  lb1,  19  2b,  21  lc  4b,  33  lc  8b  9a,  54  15b ;  iv  2  3a,  4  Id7, 
6  3a,  12  6c,  16  5b,  22  3c,  26  6d,  29  3c,  37  la1;  v  2  9d,  8  5b, 
32  6a,  36  lb,  41  3a  13b,  46  7c,  54  lie,  87  9a;  vi  1  3c,  2  lie, 
10  3d,  13  4d,  16  46a3,  17  lOd1,  20  6c,  21  6d4  7a,  23  9a,  26  Id1,  29  5b, 
40  2d,  49  14d,  50  7a  12c  12d  14a,  63  8b1,  64  Id  3b,  65  lb,  66  lc  8dJ ; 
vii  1  3a5  9a1  13a1  14c,  3  10a,  6  7a,  8  5c,  16  4a,  18  17d,  19  7d\ 

28  3d1,  34  24a,  40  5c,  41  7c,  43  3b,  56  17b,  57  3b  6d,  60  4c,  61  4b, 
67  5a  5c,  68  5a,  70  la,  76  6a  7b,  77  2a  5a,  84  la  lc,  86  4c,  88  3c3, 
95  5a;        viii  25  18c,  26  5c1,  35  4a  6a,  60  10a1,  96  2b6;        ix  69  8d, 


Weak  caesura  191 

70  lb  2c,  73  5d,  74  4a,  75  3b,  86  4c  36b,  91  4a,  93  4d,  94  3a,  96  17a 
97  27d  34b  53c  53d,  107  16a  26c,  110  8a;  x  4  6c,  *10  10a,  22  15d' 
23  4a,  *27  12a,  30  Id,  35  4b,  39  7d,  43  4b,  45  4b,  *59  3a,  61  4b  12c'1 
13b  16c  23b,  64  3a1,  70  lie,  74  la1,  76  lb,  *85  23b,  91  7b,  93  6a 
*95  6b,  99  5d,  *101  7d,  *103  lie,  111  3c,  *120  3c  *5d,  126  8c' 
133  7c. 

1  with  short  eighth  syllable.  2  §  127  6.  3  §  151  iii.  4  §  158. 

5  impv.  -hi  in  eighth  place.  6  §  159  iv.  7  doubtful :  see  §  159  i. 

(v)  Short  final  syllables  in  the  eighth  place  are  specially  common 
in  the  Vasistha  hymns :  if  however  we  except  those  instances  which 
occur  in  the  verses  already  referred  to,  they  are  not  so  common  as  in 
the  archaic  period  or  in  the  Vamadeva  hymns.  It  does  not  therefore 
appear  that  this  variation  is  by  itself  an  indication  of  '  secondary 
caesura':  but  in  the  cases  referred  to  it  is  corroboratory  evidence  of 
this  type. 

214.  Both  forms  of  the  'weak  caesura'  (§  205)  are  charac- 
teristic of  the  archaic  period.  There  is  however  some  difficulty  in 
determining  the  extent  of  these  variations,  even  when  occurrences 
in  verses  which  have  secondary  caesura  are  excluded  from  con- 
sideration. 

A  caesura  separating  two  elements  in  a  word  may  confidently 
be  postulated  where  the  rhythm  of  the  break  confirms  it,  as  in 
the  following  examples : 

dasmdsya  c&amp;ru  \\  -tamam  asti  ddmsah         i  62  6b 
ddabdhavrata  \\  -pramatir  vdsisthah  ii    9  lc 

dnibhrsta  \\  -tavisir  hanti  qjasd  25  4c. 

Conversely,  the  absence  of  any  regular  rhythm  in  the  break 

makes  the  '  weak  caesuras '  postulated  in  the  following  examples 

very  doubtful : 

ye  dhenuih  visva  y  -juvam  visvdrupdm  iv  33  8  b 

tatakse  \\  sUrydya  cid  okasi  sve  v  33  4c. 

The  consideration  which  seems  decisive  in  favour  of  metrical 

interpretation   by   means   of  the   'weak   caesura'   in    the   latter 

instances  is  the  extreme  rarity  of  trimeter  verses  which   cannot 

be  explained  in  one  or  other  of  these  ways.     Undoubtedly  the 

phonetic  character  of  the  Vedic  dialect  makes  a  pause  of  some 

kind  at  one  of  the  points  named  almost  unavoidable :  but  only  a 

very  strong  metrical  feeling  for  the  necessity  of  such  a  pause  can 

account  for  our  finding  only  three  trimeter  verses  in  the   whole 

Rigveda  which  have  certainly  no  caesura  of  any  kind,  namely 

tudm  sahdsrdni  satd  ddsa  prdti  ii     1  8d 

sumndm  iyaksantas  tutivato  nrn  ii  20  Id 

indra  svddisthayd  gird  saclvah  iii  53  2d. 


192  Weak  caesura 

A  weak  caesura  separating  two  parts  of  a  compound  is  also  found 
in  Virgil :  see  Dr  A.  W.  VerralPs  note  on  '  the  metrical  division  of 
compound  words  in  Virgil '  in  the  Classical  Review  for  July  1904. 

The  instances  of  '  weak  caesura '  are  as  follows,  those  which  imply 
an  irregular  rhythm  at  the  break  having  an  indication  to  that  effect 
attached  : 

(i)  The  caesura  follows  the  prior  element  of  a  compound  or 
derivative:  i  30  16c1,  35  5b,  36  lc2  10c,  52  9c,  58  8b1,  60  5c1,  [61  3c 
4d]  5c3  5d  16a  16c],  62  lb  6a  6b,  63  2c2,  64  3b1,  116  3d,  120  9a, 
122  2a1,  127  5b,  129  4b1,  141  12a,  148  lb1,  184  2c;  ii  4  la1,  9  la  lc, 
19  8a1,  25  4c,  34  8d;  iii  2  7d,  26  5d,  53  16d,  58  7c  9a;  iv  1  4c1 
6b1  8b1  19b,  3  lb1,  22  3a1,  23  6d,  33  8bl,  41  3d,  42  8d;  vi  2  11a1, 
4  7a,  11  4d,  15  4c,  16  46c1,  20  lc  5c1  18c1 4  lie  13d1,  24  6c,  26  5d\ 
29  4a,  33  4d\  34  2b  3d,  44  lOd,  51  10a,  68  lb  2d1  6a  7a;  vii  2  7b, 
4  5d,  8  6d,  14  lc,  23  5b,  *33  11a,  38  2d  5d,  58  2b,  60  8d,  *66  16a1, 
81  4c,  88  6c1;  viii  21  9b,  23  19c,  27  lie,  60  17c,  61  14a1,  66  6c1, 
87  5c,  99   lc  ;  ix  72  4a1,  83  5c1,  84  la,  86  40c1,  88  3d,  94  Id, 

108  13b;  x  [1  5a],  *17  5b,  22  10a1,  35  14d,  48  8b1,  50  lb,  61  13d 
15c  15d  21c,  74  6c,  76  2b,  *85  37a1,  *98  5b,  99  8d\  *101  2b,  105  4c 
lid1  lie1,  122  la,  140  6c,  160  la,  *]67  4d.  Occurrences  in  dvandva 
compounds,  as  indra  n  -varund,  are  not  included  (§  205  i). 

1  an  irregular  rhythm  results.  2  after  third  syllable.  3  Viratsthana 

verse.  4  reading  Sasvddibham  in  one  word. 

(ii)  The  caesura  follows  the  third  syllable  :  i  36  lc1,  [61  2b], 
62  2d  5a  5b  5c,  73  8a2,  122  8c,  127  2b,  135  4f3,  186  5b ;  iv  2  19d, 

7  lid,  26  4b;  v  33  4c,  49  5b;  vi  3  4d  6b  8b,  11  3c,  20  4d, 

24  7d2,  33  2b;  vii  20  6a,  37  8c4,  61   Id,  69  3a;  viii  96  3b, 

97   13a;  ix  72   lc,  93  5b,  97  31d  ;  x  32  5d,  50  5b,  65   15b, 

68  2a,  *95  7a,  105  5c,  115  2d.  For  examples  accompanied  by 
secondary  caesura  see  §  213  ii. 

1  caesura  after  prior  element  of  compound.  2  §  151  iii.  3  §  149  iii. 

4  but  see  Metrical  Comm. 

Apart  from  the  weak  caesura  irregularities  are  few  and  historically 
unimportant :  but  we  may  conveniently  record  here  the  following 
instances : 

(iii)     The  caesura  is  at  the  point  of  Sandhi  combination  :  i  118  7a 
7c,  155  4d,   186  8c;         v    45  9b;         *vi    75   18b;         viii    46  22a; 
ix    87  5b;         x    50  3c.     See  also  §  205  i. 

(iv)  The  metre  is  so  uncertain  that  the  position  of  the  caesura 
cannot  be  determined  in  *i  162   16c,  iv  26  7a,  and  viii  46  20a. 

(v)  The  verses  i  122  5c,  v  33  7a,  and  vi  12  6a  appear  to  be 
dimeter  verses,  but  as  they  Occur  in  hymns  which  are  otherwise  in 
trimeter  metre  the  text  is  probably  incorrect. 

215.  The  opening  provides  very  little  material  which  can  be 
used  for  the  historical  investigation  of  small  groups  of  hymns : 


The  opening  193 

its  metrical  character  being  less  marked  than  that  of  other  parts 
of  the  verse,  and  the  changes  that  take  place  being  more  gradual. 
Still  a  history  of  Vedic  metre  would  be  incomplete  without  some 
account  of  its  developement,  and  the  attempt  is  therefore  made 
here  to  discuss  this  part  of  the  verse  in  more  detail  than  was 
done  in  §  206.  In  consequence  of  the  large  number  of  possible 
forms  this  is  a  rather  complicated  task. 

Perhaps  the  clearest  view  of  the  rhythm  is  obtained  by 
examining  the  quantities  of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  syllables 
according  as  (i)  the  caesura  is  early,  (ii)  the  caesura  is  late  and 
the  fifth  syllable  long,  or  (iii)  the  caesura  is  late  and  the  fifth 
syllable  short. 

The  table  at  the  end  of  this  section  gives  accordingly  the 
proportions  in  which  each  possible  form  is  found  under  each  of 
these  conditions,  and  also  the  corresponding  proportions  in  dimeter 
verse,  in  three  selected  groups  of  hymns.  To  obtain  the  clearest 
possible  view  we  take  the  groups  of  which  the  historical  character 
is  in  other  ways  the  most  pronounced,  namely  (i)  the  lyric  verse 
of  group  I  (§  91),  (ii)  the  normal  group  VI,  and  (iii)  the  popular 
Rigveda. 

It  appears  at  once  that  all  the  groups  agree  in  the  general 
contrast  between  the  regular  forms  ----(-),  and  the  irregular 
forms  ^  ^  ^  ^  (^)  which  have  '  consecutive  short  syllables '  in  the 
second  and  third  places :  but  that  forms  which  have  consecutive 
short  syllables  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  places  are  also  irregular. 
The  remaining  forms  may  be  considered  as  occasional  forms  under 

all  conditions,  the  '  syncopated '  type  -  ^ (-)  being  everywhere 

the  most  common ;  but  occasional  forms  are  comparatively  rare 
where  the  caesura  is  late. 

In  the  two  extreme  groups  there  is  (except  as  just  stated) 
very  little  difference  between  the  openings  in  the  four  classes : 
but  in  the  normal  group  there  is  a  very  marked  difference  between 
dimeter  and  trimeter  verse,  which  is  brought  out  by  comparing 
the  frequency  of  the  '  iambic '  form  *  -  ^  -  with  that  of  the  '  syn- 
copated '  form  ^  ^ .     For  whilst  in  dimeter  verse  the  iambic 

form  is  not  twice  as  common  as  the  syncopated  form,  in  trimeter 
verse  it  is  never  less  than  six  times  as  common  ;  and  if  there  is  a 
long  fifth  syllable  before  the  caesura,  it  is  more  than  fifteen  times 
as  common. 

In  the  hymns  therefore  of  this  group  the  dimeter  and  trimeter 
a.  13 


194 


The  opening 


rhythm  have  developed  in  opposite  directions.  The  favour  shewn 
in  dimeter  verse  to  a  long  third  syllable  may  perhaps  be  connected 
with  the  fact  that  the  fifth  syllable  is  always  short :  but  at  any 
rate  the  favour  regularly  shewn  in  trimeter  verse  to  a  short  third 
syllable  is  most  marked  when  the  fifth  syllable  is  long. 

The  following  particulars  also  deserve  to  be  noticed : 

(i)  It  is  agreed  on  all  hands  that  the  quantity  of^  the  first  syllable 
is  in  all  cases  indifferent.  According  to  my  calculations,  the  number 
of  long  and  short  syllables  in  this  position  is  almost  exactly  the  same. 
Of.  §  183. 

(ii)  It  follows  from  the  Table  that  the  4th  syllable  is  long  in  three 
cases  out  of  four  before  early  caesura,  and  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten 
before  late  caesura,  the  difference  being  due  to  the  more  strict  rhythm 
employed  generally  in  the  latter  alternative. 

(iii)  The  line  of  distinction  between  occasional  and  irregular  forms 
cannot  be  quite  clearly  drawn.  Consecutive  short  syllables  in  the 
fourth  and  fifth  places  are  particularly  rare,  doubtless  because  the  late 
caesura  is  almost  always  followed  by  two  short  syllables.  Amongst 
the  '  occasional  forms '  ^  v^  —  ^  and  *  ^  —  ^  —  are  somewhat  rare,  and 
amongst  the  irregular  forms  -  u  u  -  -  is  rather  common. 

(iv)  The  nine  possible  types  of  irregular  opening  are  included  in 
the  formulae  ^^^^,  ^^^^^,  ^^^^^.  The  form  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^,  in 
which  the  irregularity  is  doubled,  and  every  trace  of  the  rhythm  of  the 
opening  lost,  is  naturally  very  rare:  yet  we  find  a  few  examples  of  it,  as 

nd  ni  misati  ..  surdno  dive-dive         *iii  29  14c. 


Table  shewing  the  rhythm  of  the  opening. 


Groups 

Lyric  (I) 

Normal  (VI) 

Popular  (X) 

Dim. 

A 

B 

C 

Dim. 

A      B 

C 

Dim. 

\a 

B      C 

Regular  forms: 

i=  _   w  _ 

29 

29 

39 

53 

28 

43     61 

44 

31 

1  33 

43     48 

~  _  _  _ 

39 

34 

31 

36 

39 

36    24 

44 

37 

33 

34     36 

Occasional  forms: 

-  « 

11 

13 

11 

7 

16 

7      4 

7 

11 

12 

8       8 

~ ^1 

10 

13 

o 

•5 

7 

6      3 

1 

10 

;n 

4       2 

at  _  w  vl 

4 

5 

5 

•5 

3 

4      4 

1 

3 

i  5 

3       1 

~  ~  _  - 1 

4 

3 

5 

0 

5 

3      2 

0 

5 

3 

3       1 

Irregular  forms: 

=  ~  ~  _ 

2 

2 

4 

3 

2 

2       1 

2 

2 

3 

2       3 

—  — '  v  ""* 

•5 

1 

0 

0 

0 

•5    0 

0 

1 

1 

•5      -5 

A.  Trimeter  verse  with  early  caesura. 

B.  Tnmeter  verse  with  late  caesura  and  long  fifth  syllable. 
C         ii  H  m  &gt;&lt;       short     ,,  „ 

The  figures  are  proportional  to  100  verses  of  each  class. 

1  These  forms  are  irregular  in  C. 


Irregular  openings  195 

216.  The  instances  of  consecutive  short  syllables  in  the 
second  and  third  places  in  trimeter  verse  are  about  650  in  number, 
the  proportion  being  slightly  larger  than  in  dimeter  verse  (§  190). 
In  fully  one  half  of  the  instances  the  second  syllable  contains  a 
short  final  vowel,  or  -a  as  representing  final  -ah  or  -e:  for  the 
final  short  vowel  the  text  in  several  instances  gives  a  long  vowel, 
or  substitutes  -o  for  final  -a  (§  171  iv).  Only  in  some  33  instances 
do  we  find  a  similar  short  final  vowel  in  the  third  place  :  and  we 
therefore  have  repeated  the  phenomenon  already  noticed  in  di- 
meter verse  (§  189),  that  a  short  final  vowel  is  specially  capable 
of  bearing  the  ictus  if  it  occurs  in  the  second  place. 

There  are  less  than  200  examples  of  consecutive  short  syllables 
in  the  fourth  and  fifth  places.  In  these  instances  the  fourth 
syllable  only  rarely  contains  a  final  vowel :  nor  is  there  any  trace 
of  any  special  metrical  value  of  the  fifth  syllable. 

Similar  metrical  phenomena  are  observable  in  the  cadence : 
and  the  problem  as  a  whole,  and  its  connexion  with  the  question 
of  protracted  vowels,  are  further  discussed  in  §  221. 

Consecutive  short  syllables  in  either  position  are  less  common 
in  the  normal  period  than  elsewhere. 

Out  of  about  350  instances  of  final  short  vowels  in  the  second 
place  quoted  below,  about  35  are  instances  in  which  the  text  gives  a 
long  vowel,  but,  as  is  held,  on  insufficient  grounds.  Whether  this 
number  is  too  large  or  too  small  the  general  argument  is  unaffected. 

(i)  CoDsecutive  short  syllables  appear  in  the  second  and  third 
places  in  trimeter  verse  as  follows : 

(a)  the  ictus  falls  on  a  final  vowel  of  a  word  or  of  the  prior  element 
of  a  compound  or  derivative:  i  32  lb  14c4,  33  9a,  39  f6al,  51  12c, 
54  lb,  55  4b,  57  5a,  59  7c4,  64  lid,  [68  2a],  76  la  4b,  77  3d,  87  lc  2b, 
89  3c,  96  7a,  100  14b,  104  7c,  113  5a  6c,  116  8b  tl4c2  25b,  118  2d 
10c,  121  4a,  124  14a1,  127  3a,  129  fSa11,  131  f6a2,  140  fl3a3,  143  8d, 
149  lb,  152  2d,  153  |4c2,  *162  lb  *14c,  *163  3a  *4a  *6c  *lla,  *164 
lOd  *lld4  *31b  *36d  *41b  *43a  *45b,  165  4b  6a  9d,  167  lOd,  *170  5c, 
171  la,  177  2b4,  182  2a  4a,  186  la  lc  4a  5a  6a  7a  8a;  ii  2  2c,  4  lc, 
9  4c,  10  6d12,  [11  t5c2],  12  8b,  13  lOd,  15  Id,  20  8c,  21  la  lc  2a,  31  6c, 
33  13c,  38  8b,  39  8c;  iii  1  21c,  5  8c,  7  f6a2  flOc2,  9  9a,  25  5a, 
*28  4d,  *29  2b  *6d  *14c,  30  19c  20b13,  31  20c,  32  2c4,  33  6c  6d,  35  13a1, 
36  2d,  43  2d  7a  7c  7d,  49  2c,  50  Id,  51  7a,  54  2a  f4a2;  iv  1  6c, 
2  4a,  4  4c,  5  5b  lid  12d,  6  3d,  12  6b,  16  14a  20b4,  *18  3d4  *4a,  19  6d, 
24  7c,  26  3c4  6d,  28  lb,  38  fla-  3d  4b  4d  10b,  54  4a,  57  3a12;  v  29 
2a  6a4,  30  6a,  33  la  2d  10a,  41  2b  7a  |7d10  8a  fl6b5  16d  19a,  48  |2c6 
5b,  49  4a,  54  8b  10b  15d,  60  3d,  62  lc4 ;  vi  4  3c,  5  3c  4c,  6  5b, 
8  Id,  *15  19b,  20  la  5c,  21  2c,  26  5c,  27  3d,  30  lb,  40  la  2a  4b,  44  14a 
19b4,  47  13a*28d,  48  lc  14c,  49  14a  15d,  50  14a,  51  3c  8a,  61  13c, 

13—2 


196  Irregular  openings 

63  9a  9d4,  70  la;  vii  1  6a  f8c2  16c  18c,  8  2d,  16  6c,  20  3a,  21  2d, 
24  4b4,  28  fla7,  *33  14a,  34  [17a  18a]  24a,  *35  3b  *4d  *9a  *12c  *13a 
*13b  *13c,  39  5c,  41  7b,  45  4b,  46  lb,  53  f3a2,  56  16b,  58  5d,  59  4a 
4c,  60  5c,  64  2b  2d,  67  12b1,  77  fla1,  81  flc,;,  82  3a,  84  13c1,  88  3c, 
92  flc',  93  13a1,  97  7a,  98  2c,  99  2b  5b4,  100  2b,  *103  9a,  *104  8c 
*19b  *19d  *24a ;  viii  1  24c4,  19  33a,  21  3b  |8c2,  23  3c,  27  10a,  53  6a, 
54  6a,  60  14a,  61  9c,  96  fed1  lid  15c,  98  lc4 ;  ix  69  f  2a1,  73  8b,  79 
lc  3d,  86  16c,  90  5d,  92  3d  94  la,  95  3d,  96  2b  18a,  97  |49c3  f  51a3  53a 
55c  55d,  108  14a,  110  5a,  11a;  x  4  7a4,  8  4a  5c,  *10  |13b8,  *13  3a4, 
*15  Id  *13a,  *16  5a,  *17  6d,  *18  3c,  23  7b,  *27  21c,  30  10b  13a,  31 
6c,  *34  8b,  37  3a,  48  f7b3,  49  lid,  *52  6a,  *53  4c14  *4d4  *5a4,  54  6d4, 
*59  6d,  61  26b,  63  16c,  66  5c4  8d,  68  2b  3a12,  69  2d  12c,  *71  |4c2,  73 
|9b2,  74  4b,  76  4a  8d,  77  8c,  *82  7d,  *87  19c,  *88  18b,  89  10b,  *94  7d4, 
*95  4b  f9b9,  96  4a,  99  7c  8d  lid,  *102  2b  *7c  *10a,  *103  6a,  *108  5b 
*7d  *8a,  110  lc,  116  2a,  *117  lc2  *4a  *6c,  *120  2c  *6b  *7d,  *121  4a 
*4b  *4c,  126  8b,  *130  lb,  131  7a,  139  3c,  147  5b,  160  3b,  *168  3b, 
*177  3b,  178  3b. 

1  text  upo.              -  text  utd.  3  text  abM.               4  -a  from  stem  in  -an,  ef. 

§§  166  v.,  175  i.              5  §  142  i.  «  text  dpo.              &lt;  text  brdhma,  see  §  175  i. 

8  reading  tdva  mdnah,  §  151  iii.  9  §  151  i,  but  doubtful.                  10  text  hd. 

11  text  prd-pnl.             «  cf .  §  166  it.  13  cf.  §  168  ii.             ^  §  121  c. 

(6)  the  ictus  falls  on  a  similar  final  vowel  in  the  third  place  :  i  44 
14c,  [65  9a],  152  4c,  167  8b  8d,  174  10b,  183  4b;  ii  3  3a,  23  17c, 
40  6c;  iii  *29  15b;  v  41  9c,  62  6a  ;  vi  10  lb,  27  3b,  49  9a, 
66  6d  9d;  vii  1  2b,  9  4b,  20  7c,  [34  10b],  *35  lie,  61  3b;  viii  24 
5c;  ix  70  7a,  88  7b;  x  55  4a,  64  Id,  73  8d,  *95  11a,  *103  3a, 
105  4b  7c. 

(c)  the  ictus  falls  elsewhere:  i  31  16d,  35  8b1,  51  4a,  53  11a,  57  3d, 
58  2a,  61  9d,  63  3b,  64  14a,  [67  10a],  71  8a,  88  2a,  91  20c  22a  22b, 
92  lie  12c,  94  lb,  100  4c  6c,  107  2b,  108  2a,  109  7a,  110  3a  5a,  111 
3d,  114  4d,  116  10a  10c  18c  21c  22d  25d,  117  lOd  16c,  121  8d  9d, 
123  9d  10c,  124  2a  2b,  125  2a,  127  3f  5f,  130  6f,  134  4a  4f,  139  lib, 
140  lb  4c,  141  6b,  155  4a,  158  2c,  *161  6d  *8a  *12c,  *162  13c  *14a 
*20b,  *164  40a,  168  9b,  *179  2c  *4d,  181  7d  9b;  ii  1  lie,  2  3c  4b, 
[11  7c],  12  2a,  13  12a,  15  4b  6c,  16  lc,  19  3c  6b  7b,  20  2c  7c,  24 
11a,  27  2d  13a,  30  lc,  32  lb,  34  9c,  38  4d ;  iii  20  la,  23  la,  *29 
2a  *14b  *14d  *16c,  32  6a,  33  3c,  48  3b,  51  4c,  61  3d;  iv  2  11a 
19b,  3  9d  12d  16c,  4  5d,  5  6b  10b,  7  la,  16  2d,  17  7a  10b,  *18  2a, 
19  6c,  26  2c,  28  5d,  33  8d,  35  3a  7c  9c,  36  Id,  38  4c,  39  5a,  42  4a,  56 
2b,  57  2b;  v  30  3c  12a,  31  8a  8b  8c,  33  10b,  *40  7a,  41  16c, 
45  lb,  54  3d  10a  14b,  57  3c,  62  3c  5b,  85  7a ;  vi  4  7b,  6  4d,  20  2b 
8b  13c,  22  5d,  30  lc  Id  5a,  35  5c  5d,  38  2d  3b,  39  2a  2c,  44  12c  17b 
22d  23a,  46  13c,  47  2d  *30b,  48  lib,  61  la,  62  7a  11a,  64  lb,  66  7c, 
69  5c  5d,  70  Id,  72  2d  4c ;  vii  5  3b,  8  6d,  20  lb,  32  9c  13a,  *33  9d 
*12d,  [34  16a2],  37  6a,  38  6d,  41  6d,  45  3c,  48  2a,  71  2c,  76  Id,  79  4a, 
80  2d,  81  3c,  98  2a,  99  3b  6d,  *103  10b;  viii  20  5b,  26  9c  12c,  46 
28a,  49  8c,  96  14a  18d;  ix  70  6b,  72  3a,  73  5d,  79  4b,  86  4c  6a,  89 
Id  3b,  97  23b  41d,  106  7c,  110  8c;  x  4  lc,  *14  6a,  *15  5b,  23  5c, 
36  13a,  39  2a  9c  10c,  45  8c,  [46  8b],  47  2c,  48  6c,  50  2b,  *52  2c  *3c, 
54  2a  3d  6a  6b,  55  4b,  61  5d,  62  3b,  67  9b,  68  lb  5d  12a,  70  4a,  *71 


Irregular  openings  107 

2a,  73  5b  9c,  77  7a,  [78  5b],  80  4b,  *85  43b,  *88  2d,  93  8a,  *94  lib 
*95  2b,  96  4c,  99  5d,  *101   2b,  *103  7c,  106  3c,  *107  la  *5d  *6d' 
*108  11a,  *109  la,  122  7d,  123  lc,  *125  3b  *8b,  *130  4b,   131   5a| 
*139  4b  *6a,  144  5b,  148  2d,  *149  5b,  160  3a,  *182  lc  =  *2c  =  *3c. 
1  §  147  iii.  »  g  142  i. 

(ii)  It  will  be  convenient  to  note  here  the  occurrences  of 
'  protracted '  final  vowels  and  others  of  doubtful  quantity  before  a 
short  third  syllable:  namely  i  31  7c,  48  2a,  72  2c,  83  la,  115  2c,  117 
2d  9d.  118  9b,  121  12d,  122  7c  8d  9d  lod1,  123  12a,  129  11a2,  140 
13a,  *163  4d,  *164  3d  *21a  *33d  *40c2,  165  2d,  166  8a1,  183  3c, 
186  5c,  189  4a2;  ii  [11  17d2],  17  6c,  24  lOd,  32  2d;  iii  23  Id, 
51  2c,  53  5c  6c,  60  2c,  61  2b;  iv  26  7c,  36  9c,  42  9d,  43  6d, 
51  4c;  v  8  7b,  30  lb,  36  lc1  6d,  41  17c,  44  9c  9d,  54  15b,  58  6b, 
87  5c;  vi  1  7b,  2  lie2,  17  lid,  49  5c,  *75  8c  *llc;  vii  1  4c 
13a2  24c,  20  8d,  21  6c,  41  5b  7a,  47  3al,  71  3b  3c1,  72  lb,  83  2a  2c 
2d,  100  2d,  101  3d;  viii  3  9c  10a  12a2  12c2,  20  2a  6c,  61  12c,  96 
10d2;  ix  74  5b,  89  7c2,  97  26a,  104  2c,  108  4a,  110  lie;  x  8  6b, 
*10  8d,  *15  9a,  *18  13d,  *28  8d,  36  8b,  40  5d,  42  4c,  47  4c,  *51  5a2, 
*52  Id,  *53  8c,  *71  2c,  76  4d,  [78  lb],  *88  17a,  91  15c,  *101  Id, 
*102  9c,  *109  lc,  *114  7d,  *121  5b,  138  lc,  *149  2a,  160  lb. 
1  -a  for  -an  (§  166  v).  2  imperative  in  -dhi,  -hi. 

(iii)  Consecutive  short  syllables  are  found  in  the  fourth  and  fifth 
places  in  i  32  5d,  36  15c,  48  6a,  53  10b,  59  4a,  [68  lb,  70  7b],  88  6b,  95 
10b,  100  16b1,  104  lc,  110  3c,  112  3b,  116  2a,  117  14d,  121  Id,  124  7b, 
128  la,  151  4d,  152  lc,  154  5a  6d,  155  Id,  *163  8a,  *164  5c  *8a  *8d 
*44a,  168  5c2,  173  8c,  174  3d  8d,  *179  3b,  183  5b,  184  2b,  189  7d; 
ii  2  2d3,  12  8b,  17  7a,  19  7d,  20  la,  30  4b,  31  6b,  33  Id;  iii  2 
5b,  15  3c,  *29  14c,  43  2b,  46  4b,  49  2b,  53  9d,  58  7c  7d  8a  9a,  60  7b, 

61  3b;  iv  1  14a,  2  3c,  5  9c,  6  4a,  27  lc,  34  5c,  40  2b  5c ;  v  2 
5c,  31  13b,  41  3c  16e,  44  2c,  54  lid  13c,  57  5b  6c,  62  4b,  63  3d  6d, 
81  la ;  vi  3  5c,  7  la  4c  6b,  10  2d,  15  5b,  23  lb  f  8a,  24  9a,  25  3a, 
*28  6d,  29  3d,  31  5c4,  35  4b,  36  2b,  39  2b  3a  3d  4a  4c,  40  5a,  44  [8a] 
16b  18b,  47  4b  10b,  49  2b  8b  12c,  50  4d  6c,  51  lc  Id,  52  15b  17a, 

62  6a,  64  3d,  68  lOd,  69  5b,  *74  lb;  vii  1  4a,  8  2a5,  9  3a,  12  2d 
3a,  18  24d,  23  5b,  *35  4d,  37  3a,  38  5c,  41  3b,  45  3d,  46  3b,  48  2a, 
[56  9b],  59  8a,  75  5d,  97  4d,  99  5d,  *104  lie;  viii  9  lc,  21  18c, 
35  16a  17a  18a,  *48  2d,  52  8c,  53  3c,  89  3c;  ix  72  6b,  88  6d, 
107  10c;  x  3  2d,  5  7d,  [6  2d],  7  5b,  *10  8b  *10c,  *18  12b,  31  9a6, 
*32  9b,  39  8c,  45  8c,  47  8b,  48  lid,  *56  4c  *6a,  66  10a,  69  2c,  73  3d, 
74  3a  6d,  76  la,  *87  14d,  89  4a  7b  |9d7  17a,  *94  14a,  *95  3a,  96  5c, 
105  7c,  106  8a,  *108  11a,  *120  3d  *5c  *7a  *7b,  *121  8c,  148  3a, 
172  4b. 

1  §  139  i.  2  §  147  iii.  3  §  142  iii  a.  4  §  177  iii.  5  §  148  vii. 

6  §  142  i.  7  reading  vfsanam,  §  170  ii  c. 

217.  The  opening  is  frequently  defective  by  one  syllable,  and 
in  such  cases  it  is  a  convenient  assumption,  agreeable  to  analogy 
if  not  strictly  proved,  that  the  defect  is  caused  by  a  rest  at  the 
fourth  place.     The  instances  are  discussed  in  §  228. 


i 

127  If 

ii 

18  5b 

vii 

32  12c 

*x 

87  13c 

*x 

88  9b 

198  The  iambic  break 

Hypersyllabic  openings  are  not  permissible,  except  in  the 
'  hybrid '  verse,  for  which  see  §  229.  The  only  other  examples 
which  require  explanation  are  as  follows  : 

ghrtdsya  vibhrastim  \\  dnu  vasti  socisd 
d  catvdrimsdtd  u  hdribhir  yujdndh 
yd  indro  hdrivdn  \\  nd  dabhanti  tdm  ripah 
manyor  mdnasah  u  saravya  jdyate  yd 
ydsmin  djuhavur  \\  bhuvandni  visvd 

218.  Almost  all  the  forms  of  the  break  are  of  historical 
importance  :  but  considerations  of  space  make  it  impossible  to 
give  full  lists  of  the  occurrences  of  the  normal  and  subnormal 
forms.  The  list  already  given  in  §  95  ii  shews  the  hymns  in 
which  the  ere  tic  variation  is  most  prominent. 

Occurrences  of  the  iambic  forms  in  connexion  with  secondary 
caesura  have  been  enumerated  above  (§  213). 

All  the  remaining  occurrences  of  iambic  forms,  and  all  the 
occurrences  of  irregular  forms,  indicate  early  date,  except  that  the 
history  of  the  form  ^  h  -  ^  is  to  some  extent  parallel  to  that  of  the 
secondary  caesura. 

It  is  difficult  to  define  precisely  the  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable  : 
and  where  it  is  very  weak  it  has  seemed  desirable  to  include  the 
examples  under  this  heading  rather  than  above,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  the  principal  caesura  itself  is  sometimes  very  slight  (§  205  i). 

The  following  are  examples  of  verses  so  included  in  this  section  : 

hota  tdm  u  ||  ndmobhir  d  kruudhvam  i  77  2b 

puruhuta  (|  purtivaso  'surayhndh  vi  22  4d. 

(i)  The  following  are  the  occurrences  of  the  iambic  break  u  v  —  w 
without  secondary  caesura:  i  33  12a  14d,  36  12a  16c,  40  4a,  48  fSa1, 
56  3a,  62  lOd,  [67  9b],  77  2b,  79  Id,  89  4a,  91  3c  |23b2,  92  14c  18c, 
120  6b,  122  9b,  135  5a  |9a3,  149  2a,  174  4b,  181  lb,  186  6d,  190  6d ; 

ii  20  2b,  26  lb  2b,  33  2b,  38  10b11;  iii  1  15c;  iv  6  5a,  12  2b, 
16  7c,  20  8a,  27  4c,  29  4d,  35  7c,  37  4a,  42  4a;  v  4  7b,  33  |6d4, 
45  3c  lie,  46  8a,  53  2c  6c,  87  3c  7b  9b  ;  vi  10  3b,  12  3d,  15  14d, 
20  10b,  22  4d5,  23  la  10c,  25  2d,  26  lc  4d,  29  5d,  34  2b,  35  la  lb  4a, 
37  5c,  44  15c,  46  8c,  47  20d,  48  8c,  60  3b,  66  2c,  68  4a ;  vii  4  6b, 
16  6c,  18  2d,  19  10a,  20  10c,  21  5b,  27  2d6  3d,  31  12a,  56  15c  17c, 
74  4c,  81  4a,  82  |2a2,  86  8b,  92  4b,  97  4c;  viii  4  lc  16c,  18  10c, 
19  5b  lib  13b  20a  28b,  21  |12c7,  23  6c  15c,  26  4c  |7c8,  27  13c,  29  3a 
4a  5a  16a1,  33  2c,  46  17b,  70  8c,  97  14b9,  103  12b  13a ;  ix  68  9a, 
84  Id,  90  2b,  97  44a  53b,  108  9b  10a  10c,  110  la;  x  [6  5b],  31  lOd, 
44  5a,  48  3d,  50  lb,  61  26c,  62  6c,  79  5b  6d,  *95  8d  *llb,  99  5a, 
113  6b,  *120  5b,  *130  Id,  *142  4b,  144  5c  6c,  160  5b10. 

For  the  occurrences  connected  with  'secondary  caesura'  see  §  213  iii. 

1  §  169  iii.  2  §  151  iii.  3  §  170  ii/.  4  §  166  vi  b.  5  §  166  iv. 

6  §  167  i.  7  §  178.  8  §  174  i  a.  9  §  224.  1(&gt;  §  145  v.  n  §  142  i. 


The  iambic  break  191) 

(ii)  The  iambic  break  s/  u  —  w,  even  apart  from  secondary  caesura, 
is  very  much  more  common,  occurring  as  follows:  i  31  17a,  33  3c  15c, 

34  4d,  52  2d,  53  10b,  55  3c,  58  3c,  59  la  3c,  [61  lc  14c  16b],  77  5d, 
79  5c1,  84  20a,  85  4b  lid,  87  3b  5d  6d,  88  2d,  91  4b  18d,  100  4a  16d, 
101  8c,  108  lib,  111  2a  2b  2c  3b  5a,  116  lb  2a  3a  8c  9c  12b,  117  14a, 
120  4b  8a,  122  5b  13c,  124  4a,  127  6b,  128  4b  7b,  131  4a  5a  7a,  133 
6f,  141  10b,  149  2b,  153  4b,  155  lb  Id,  156  lb  4b,  *164  lid,  165  15b, 
168  3c,  169  6a  8a,  173  lid  12a,  177  5b,  180  5b3,  181  5c  6c;  ii  1  13c, 
4  4c,  [11  3a  4c  13a  15a  17a  17b],  14  6b,  15  8b  8c,  17  la  Id  8c,  18  2c, 
20  la,  24  3b  10c,  27  12b,  31  3b,  33  10a,  35  5c;  iii  1  14b  17b  18d 
20b,  2  6b  lib,  3  9c  11a,  6  10a,  8  8d,  15  3c,  25  2a,  35  2d,  53  lc  14a, 
56  7c,  60  7d;  iv  1  6c  6d,  3  la,  4  5b,  6  la  7d,  7  lb  8a,  16  2a  14d, 
17  19b,  *1 8  2d,  21  6b  8a,  23  3a,  28  5b,  34  3d,  37  2d,  55  2a;  v  1  7a, 
4  lb,  8  7c,  27  2a,  28  3b,  30  9a,  31  2c  3b  13a,  33  4b,  36  2b  2c4,  41  4d 
10a  10c  14a,  43  14d,  44  lie,  45  3a  7a,  46  2b,  48  3b,  49  4c,  *83  Id  ; 

vi  4  6a,  12  4a  4d,  13  2a,  15  3b  5c,  17  14d,  19  3d,  20  5d,  22  10c, 
23  lb  6d,  24  4c  6a  9c,  26  5a,  31  2a  4b,  33  3b,  34  3a,  37  2d,  38  5d, 
41  5a,  42  4c,  44  12b,  46  lc  2a  5c  14c,  47  22a,  63  4a,  66  lb,  68  6a, 
*74  3b ;  vii  1  16c  18b  20a  23b,  2  7a,  3  3d  5b  5d,  4  7c,  6  2c,  7  lc 
3b,  14  2c,  17  5b,  18  19d,  19  5a  9b,  20  6b,  21  4a  7d  8b,  23  2a,  24  6a, 
26  5a,  28  3a,  30  Id,  32  4c,  *33  2c,  36  3b,  37  4b  8b,  39  3d  4a,  43  la  2a 
2c  2d,  52  2c,  56  22b,  57  lc,  58  2c,  60  7d,  62  2b,  67  6a  6b,  70  3b,  81  4c, 
85  2a  3d,  86  lb,  87  7a,  88  3b,  92  2a  3a  3d,  99  7a,  *104  17a;  viii  1 
5c  17c,  3  12a,  4  20a,  18  15c,  19  2c  10a,  20  9b  20a  20c,  21  8c,  22  15b, 
26  8c  15c,  60  3c,  70  12c,  90  4c,  96  la,  97  15a  15c,  *100  2d  *3c,  103 
lc  4c;  ix  70  3c  5a  9a  9b,  71  2a  4b,  78  3c,  86  3d  5a  34b,  92  3c, 
93  3a,  94  Id,  96  19b,  97  19a  21d,  108  16a,  110  7c;  x  [1  4d],  2  4c, 
[6  4d],  7  5b  5c,  8  2c  7d  8a,  *10  lc,  *12  6d,  *13  5b,  31  10a,  32  4d, 

35  la,  37  Id  6c,  39  14c,  40  6d,  47  8a,  48  lb  7a,  50  3d  7d,  *51  3b  *8d, 
56  2b5,  *59  lc  *6c,  61  4c  5a  8a  24a,  67  10b,  73  2c  7d  10c  lOd,  76  7d, 
77  8a,  78  [6b]  7d,  79  lb,  *83  7b,  89  14a  15b  17a,  92  3d  6d,  93  10b  15a, 
*94  7c  *8c,  *95  6d  *13a,  96  9d  10a,  105  7c,  106  7b,  112  8c,  115  5b, 
116  6b,  *121  8c,  123  2d  6b,  132  5d,  144  2c,  *165  3c2,  *181  la.  &lt; 

For  instances  connected  with  'secondary  caesura'  see  §  213  i. 

1  reading  asmabhya  :   the  instance  should  be  added  to  those  on  p.  30  (A  13). 
-  §  178.  3  §  142  ii.  4  but  see  §  177  iii.  5  §  84  A  13. 

(iii)  The  iambic  break  -  n  -  w,  apart  from  secondary  caesura, 
occurs  as  follows:  i  34  lie,  40  7c,  48  6c,  55  lc  Id  4b  7a  7b,  62  3d, 
85  8d  lib,  88  4c,  91  20d,  92  15c,  96  6b,  103  3a,  111  3c,  112  11a,  113 
7c,  121  14a,  122  10c,  133  6b,  139  3a,  152  lb,  153  3d,  157  4c,  158  3a, 
*164  24b,  168  lb,  169  14c1  4d  6d,  171  6c,  173  6b  6d  12b3,  174  2b, 
180  6d,  184  4b;  ii  2  12b,  4  3a  4d,  [11  9d  13c],  13  9b,  16  2b,  19 
4d  5b,  20  lb  5c,  23  7d,  31  2d;  iii  2  5d,  5  3a,  22  la4;  iv  6  8b 
lOd,  16  lid,  17  lid,  22  4d,  29  4a,  38  3c;  v  32  2b  4c,  41  lb  5c  7a 
7d  8a  18c4,  53  14c*;  vi  4  2a  3b,  10  5d,  11  3a2  5d,  15  2c  14b,  18  5c, 
20  10c,  26  6a,  29  lc  4d,  38  lc,  50  6a  lid4,  51  lOd,  60  3a,  63  9b,  67  5c, 
68  2a;  vii  7  5a  6a,  8  3d,  18  13a,  21  3d,  30  2b,  39  lb  3b,  42  Id,  43 
5a,  61  3c,  66  13c,  67  7d,  68  4a,  70  4a,  75  5a,  86  Id,  101  lc ;  viii  4 
8c,  5  38c,  19  2a  6a,  21  18a,  22  10c,  25  12c6,  46  26c,  70  3c,  77  10c, 
*100  5b;         ix  68  8b,  70  5d,  73  5b,  86  17c  42d,  88  6c,  94  la  lb  f3c:i, 


200  Irregular  forms  of  the  break 

104  5c;         x  *10  13c,  *12  3b,  35  5a,  41  2d,  62  7a,  76  8d,  93  12b, 
*107  10a,  *120  3b,  123  2b,  144  5a7,  148  5b,  *149  4a,  *170  4d. 
For  instances  connected  with  'secondary  caesura'  see  §  213  iv. 

1  §  169  iii.  2  §  136  ii.  3  §  151  iii.  4  §  178.  5  §  145  iv. 

6  §  170  ii/.  7  §  145  vi. 

(iv)     Of  the  irregular  forms  of  the  break  p is  by  far  the  most 

common :  the  occurrences  are  spread  not  very  unevenly  over  the  whole 
Rigveda,  as  follows:  i  *24  Id  *2d,  40  4c,  48  8c,  52  4d,  54  lie, 
71  8b,  83  3c,  91  2b  2c,  108  11a,  112  9c,  114  lib,  116  7c  18a,  120  8b 
9b  9c,  122  7d  15a,  127  8b,  |132  lb1,  134  If,  135  4a  5f,  140  8c,  141  12a, 
143  6c,  149  3c,  *161  5a  *9c  *12d2,  *162  lid,  165  13b  13d,  *170  5c, 
184  2d,  186  lc,  190  6b;  ii  1  9d  16a,  4  la  6c,  18  4a,  19  lb  2d  6d, 
20  3d,  31  4b,  34  6d  7d,  37  lb  2b;  iii  2  4a,  21  oc,  22  3c,  30  15c, 
31  8d,  33  12d,  35  9c,  *53  21d;  iv  3  3b3,  5  6b,  16  16c  18d,  21  6a, 
23  4c,  24  5b  *9c,  28  5d,  29  Id  2c  4c,  39  3a,  42  5a  flOa3,  54  3b,  55  2b, 
*57  5a;  v  2  lie,  30  3a,  33  8c,  36  5d,  41  4b  17a,  45  4a  lid,  51 
11a;  vi  10  6a,  12  la,  19  9d  lOd,  20  5c  lid,  23  4b  7a,  24  4d  10c, 
26  5b  7c,  29  4c,  35  2d,  46  7c,  *47  29c,  66  4b,  67  5d,  68  2b,  73  2d; 
vii  7  6c,  12  lb,  18  lib  22b4,  27  5b,  32  5c,  37  2c,  41  2d,  48  3c, 
67  4b,  68  5b  7b  7c,  81  3c  6c,  *103  2c,  *1()4  24a;  viii  1  16c,  4  3c, 
19  29a,  20  8c,  22  18a,  23  16c  21c,  25  5c,  26  13c5,  33  5c,  46  16a,  53  6c, 
61  8a,  66  2a  10a,  70  5c;  ix  69  7b,  83  Id,  88  3a,  91  6c,  97  52a, 
103  2c  3c,  110  2a  flS©1 ;  x  2  7c,  3  6c  7d,  *14  15c,  *15  10c,  23  2c 
5a,  *27  10b,  30  2a,  42  7d,  48  2d  11a,  50  5a,  *53  6b,  61  13d  22c,  63 
lib,  64  16d,  79  4d,  80  7b,  99  6b,  106  lb,  *107  6a,  *130  7a6,  131  2d, 
150  5a,  *169  2a. 

Of  these  occurrences  about  one-third  are  in  verses  in  which  there 
is  a  pause  after  the  eighth  syllable.  As  this  proportion  is  normal,  the 
variation  appears  not  to  be  connected  with  secondary  caesura. 

1  §  169  iii.  a  §  171  iv.  »  but  see  §  178.  4  but  perhaps  vadhnmantah, 

cf.  §  168  ii.  5  §  170  i.  6  §  177  i. 

(v)     The  irregular  break  |, ^  occurs  as  follows :  i  36  1  7c,  40  8a, 

55  7d,  83  4d,  88  4b,  121  12d,  133  7a  7f,  139  8b,  145  4b,  167  10b,  173 
7c1,  186  2a ;  ii  3  5b,  9  5a,  19  2b ;  iii  4  4d  8c,  59  2d ;  iv  3  7a, 
11  4a,  17  3c,  28  3b,  41  9c;  v  31  12d,  33  3b,  41  12a,  53  lb;  vi  13 
2d,  26  7a,  44  15b,  73  lc;  vii  1  19c,  42  6b,  56  16d,  62  2d,  71  4d ; 
viii  19  34c,  20  lib,  23  2c  28c,  24  24c,  25  6c,  27  22a,  46  5b,  63 
12d ;  ix  72  8b,  74  2d2,  88  6b;  x  *18  5d,  *28  7c,  [46  4b],  49  10c, 
55  6b,  73  3c,  80  la,  *120  5a. 

This  variation  was  treated  above  (§  94  v)  as  iambic :  but  as  it  is 
very  rare  and  has  no  connexion  with  the  secondary  caesura,  it  now 
seems  better  to  treat  it  as  irregular.  It  is  most  common  in  the 
archaic  period. 

1  §  151  i.  2  §  169  iii. 

(vi)  The  irregular  break  n  -  -  -  appears  not  only  to  be  in 
itself  unrhythmical,  but  also  directly  contrary  to  the  normal  rhythm 
after  early  caesura.  It  is  somewhat  more  common  than  might  be 
expected  under  the  circumstances.  It  is  possible  that  some  quantitative 
explanation  may  be  found  in  the  case  of  the  word  aditya,  which  occurs 


Irregular  forms  of  the  breal  201 

rather  frequently  in  this  position,  but  in  no  other  case  does  any 
particular  word  or  form  come  in  question.  The  occurrences  are  :  i  94 
6c,  103  7b,  112  lie,  115  4a,  116  22a,  124  8a,  141  8c,  *161  6c  *7c ; 
ii  3  4d',  4  8c,  17  6a,  18  4b,  19  Id,  22  lg=  2g  =  3g,  24  8a,  27  la1  3b  4a1 
lib1,  28  la1,  31  2c,  33  8d;  iii  16  3c,  18  4c,  20  5d' ;  iv  1  2d1, 
11  3b,  16  9d,  21  10c,  34  8a1,  43  4d;  v  41  15b,  51  12c!1,  69  2d,  77 
4a;  vi  26  5d  8c,  30  4a,  50  12b,  51  lid,  68  2c;  vii  88  6c,  101 
5a,  *104  2c;  viii  4  14a,  20  lb,  22  18c,  23  30c,  24  18c  23c,  25  7c, 
26  22c,  27  22c1,  29  9a,  36  7b,  37  7b,  51  2a,  60  10c  20a,  70  13c,  96  16a, 
*100  12b;  ix  81  lc,  106  13c;  x  [1  6d],  3  5c,  *12  2d  *4a,  *15  9a, 
48  2a  5c,  *52  4c,  61  7b,  74  6b,  *102  lib,  *107  9c,  *108  10a,  111  2d, 
115  9d  9e,  160  5a,  *169  2b  *3b. 

1  adityd  (10  occurrences). 

(vii)  All  the  irregular  forms  are  much  rarer  when  the  caesura  is 
late.  In  a  somewhat  large  proportion  of  the  instances  there  is  only  a 
doubtful  caesura,  following  the  prior  element  of  a  compound  :  these 
instances  are  given  separately,  and  are  not  included  in  the  Table  in 
§213  under  this  heading. 

(a)  Form  ^  |(  vy  —  (in  addition  to  occurrences  in  compounds,  for 
which  see  below):    i  62  9d,  89  5d,  127  5f,  139  3b,  174  8d,  189  7d; 

ii  4  4b,  19  7d  (=i  174  8d),  37  4c;  iii  5  7b,  30  6c;  v  3 
12a;  vi  8  lc,  20  2c  ;  x  30  13a,  56  6b,  61  14d,  65  3b,  69  7c, 
105  8c,  139  2a. 

(b)  Form  r-  „  v-:  i  60  4a,  [61  2d  9d],  62  Id,  [70  10b],  85  5d, 
*93  6b,  122  14a,  *164  lib,  173  8d,  180  10c,  186  9d,  189  3a;  ii  4 
Id,  13  13c,  18  8c,  21  6c,  23  12d  ;  iii  2  3d,  17  3c,  30  9d;  iv  4  12d, 
22  7b,  29  3d ;  v  41  14c,  42  15b,  44  3b;  vi  27  6d,  34  3c,  67  6d, 
71  lc;  vii  19  lie,  28  2d,  *35  13c,  41  3d,  99  5c;  viii  21  lb,  23 
7c,  25  15c,  61  9c,  96  15d  :  ix  86  42a,  90  lb,  108  14a;  x  8  5c, 
45  4c,  61  9a,  93  8a,  100  12a. 

(c)  Form  ^  „  -  -:  i  [61  12b],  173  9c  ;  ii  20  8c,  31  lc  ;  iv  29 
3a1;  v  41  6d;  vi  26  lb  3b,  48  14c;  vii  1  4a,  25  4a,  40  6c,  61 
2b,  67  3b,  70  6d ;         x  3  5a,  23  3d,  *95  9c,  *98  10c. 

(d)  Form  -  ||  -  -:  i  [61  lb],  127  la2,  169  7a;        ii  19  2a,  27  16d; 
iii  6  6c;       vi  26  8a,  46  12c,  63  3b;       vii  46  lb,  56  23b;       viii  19 

3b  35a,  25  24c,  54  8a,  99  7c ;  ix  103  5c ;  x  61  25d,  66  3c,  74  4b, 
79  2c,  93  7a,  *142  lb. 

The  same  forms  occur  in  compounds  as  follows:  ^  M  ^  -  i  30  16c, 
58  8b;  ii  19  8a;  iv  1  4c  6b  8b,  3  lb,  22  3a,  33  8b;  vi  2  11a, 
16  46c,  20  f8c3  13d,  33  4d,  68  2d  ;  *vii  66  16a;  viii  66  6c;  ix  72 
4a,  83  5c,  86  40c ;         x  48  8b,  *85  37a.     -  „  ^  -  i  60  5c,  viii  61  14a. 

^  H i  [61  4d],  64  3b,  122  2a,  129  4b,  148  lb;      x  22  10a,  105  lid 

lie. 

1  but  see  §  174  ii.  a  §  145  ii  c.  3  reading  sasvddibham. 

219.  The  principal  syllabic  variations  connected  with  the 
break  are  the  '  rests '  and  '  hybrid  verses,'  both  of  which  are  con- 


202  Short  eighth  syllable 

sidered  below  in  §§  225-230.  Hypersyllabic  breaks  are  very  rare 
in  the  Rigveda :  the  following  apparent  examples  occur,  and 
require  to  be  removed  by  emendation : 

tejisthdbhir  \\  ardnibhir  dasti  dvcise  i  127     4b 

hatxii  ddsyun  \\  pur  a  dyasir  ni  tdrlt  ii  20    8d 

dsmai  vaydui  u  ydd  vavtina  tad  vivisma  vi  23     5a 

hotaro  nd  u  diviydjo  mandrdtamah  ix  97  26d 

220.  The  variations  of  the  cadence  in  trimeter  verse  follow 
the  same  general  laws  which  we  find  at  work  in  normal  dimeter 
verse.  Short  syllables  take  the  place  of  long  much  more  freely 
than  vice  versa,  aud  these  variations  are  also  continued  to  a  later 
period. 

Thus  the  short  eighth  syllable  in  its  various  forms  is  not  only 
found  in  the  archaic  and  strophic  periods,  but  also  in  the  hymns 
of  Vamadeva.  Of  the  remaining  variations  again  the  short  tenth 
syllable  is  much  the  most  common  :  but  both  this  and  the  remain- 
ing forms  are  almost  confined  to  the  archaic  period. 

A  long  ninth  syllable  is  comparatively  frequent  in  Pentad 
hymns,  and  marks  the  divergence  of  this  metre  from  the  parent 
Tristubh  :  see  farther  §  249  ii. 

Examples  of  a  long  eleventh  syllable  are  hard  to  find  in  any 
part  of  the  Rigveda. 

The  occurrences  of  the  quantitative  variations  of  the  cadence  are  as 
follows : 

(i)  Short  eighth  syllable  (in  addition  to  the  examples  enumerated 
in  §213): 

(a)  Final  vowels:  i  *24  Ha,  39  4a,  51  15b,  53  2b,  71  6b,  72  6a, 
77  lc,  96  4b,  100  10a,  101  Id,  103  5d,  104  la,  112  19a,  120  2b,  121  4d 
10a,  127  7a  lOf,  129  6f,  131  la,  133  7b,  138  3f,  145  fib1,  147  4c,  148 
5d,  150  2c,  152  2b,  *161  10c  *13b,  *162  119a1,  165  13d  15a,  166  12d, 
167  10b  10c,  174  6b  8c,  183  4c,  186  10c,  189  5a;  ii  1  5d,  4  8a,  14 
3b,  30  2b,  32  lc,  33  113c1;  iii  2  7b  9b,  18  2c,  19  4a,  31  21c,  38  4a, 
46  4c,  51  3d2;  iv  2  la  6d  7d4  12a  19a,  3  7b,  4  6d  7c  12d  15d, 
5  f  Sd1  fl4c5,  6  Id  4d,  7  8c,  16  lb  4d,  21  la,  23  4c  7b,  24  4d,  27  4b, 
34  3a  5a  5d,  35  8b,  36  5d,  39  3a,  42  4b,  43  4c,  45  4b,  55  2b  5b6  5d  6d, 
57  2c;  v  1  6c,  2  8a  lOd,  3  12b,  31  5c,  33  lb  6b,  41  9d  lie,  44  4b, 
46  2c,  49  4b;  vi  1  2d  3b,  10  2b,  12  lc,  13  2c,  17  19a1  14a,  19  2d, 
21  8c  8d,  23  5b,  24  10a,  25  lc  3a7,  29  6d,  33  5b,  34  lc,  37  2b,  38  5a, 
40  3d  4c,  44  21c,  50  4b  15c,  51  9b,  66  4a  4b  7b  lOd,  67  5d  7c  11a,  72 
2a  5a  :  vii  1  8a  13b  15b8  18c  19c,  3  2a  5a,  6  4a,  17  7b,  18  lb,  24  la, 
25  2b,  29  2d,  32  5c  18c,  *33  |2d',  40  4a,  41  7a,  42  3b,  43  5c,  53  2b, 
56  15a,  59  2c  8c,  61  5d,  79  14c1,  82  9c,  86  3a,  87  7b;  viii  1  28c, 
4  21a,  19  10c  18a  124a1  24c  25b,  20  2a  8c,  21  lb,  22  13b  14a,  23  29c, 


Short  eighth  syllable  203 

24  24c3,  27  7c  16a,  *48  5a,  52  lc,  *59  4b,  60  15c,  61  8a,  66  3c,  70  4c,  96 
21a';  ix  79  lc  5c,  81  2d,  84  2a,  86  42b,  88  5c,  89  3a,  97  38b,  105 
6c,  108  13b,  110  2a;  x  [1  6c],  *10  13a,  *12  7d,  22  3a  8a  15b,  *34 
t8c5,  [46  2d],  48  2a  6b  8d,  50  2a,  *52  3a,  61  5b  6b  13d  20c  22d  65 
lid,  70  6d,  76  8a,  *82  4c,  *84  7d,  89  11a,  92  2a,  93  5b,  99  la  8a,  104 
4b,  115  9b  9d  9e,  *120  9a10,  132  3c  3d,  148  4d,  150  2c,  178  fid2. 

1  §  175  i.  ■  final  vowel  of  prior  element  in  compound.  3  §  168  iii. 

4  §  142  v.        s  §  175  a.         6  §  151  ii.         7  §  223  i.         s  §  226  i.  »  §  227  iii  c. 

10  §  178. 

(b)  Final  syllables  ending  in  a  consonant:  i  32  6b,  36  lie,  77  5a, 
89  2a,  112  9a  15a,  114  Id,  117  22c,  121  7a,  122  9d,  127  2f,  128  If  4f, 
130  lOd,  152  6a  6d,  153  3a,  158  4a  5b,  *161  5b  *7c  *13a,  *163  2d, 
*164  2c  *23b,  167  lOd,  169  5b,  182  8b,  189  4a;  ii  1  2b,  4  7b,  15 
7c,  19  7a,  30  6d,  37  2a  4c,  40  6c;  iii  1  15d,  5  7b,  19  lb  2c,  30  3b 
13b,  31  4b  8d,  36  4d,  53  15d,  54  lc,  60  2c;  iv  2  7b  9d  lid,  4  9b, 
6  2d  3b,  7  7d,  11  la  5d,  16  5a  11a,  17  20b,  19  3a,  23  7a,  27  Id,  38  7a, 
42  9al,  51  6b,  *58  11a;  v  1  2d,  2  Id,  3  12a,  29  2c,  34  2a,  48  4c,  51 
lib,  54  12d,  56  lc  5c,  87  4a;  vi  3  3a,  15  la,  34  5b,  44  16b,  61  la, 
62  6d,  67  8b;  vii  1  la  lc,  19  5d,  20  lc,  21  5d,  25  5b,  28  3d  4c  5c, 
38  6b,  40  4c,  45  3c,  52  3b,  56  21a,  61  2b,  73  3a,  75  lc,  84  2d,  92  lc, 
93  6a,  98  3b,  100  5c,  *104  12c;  viii  *1  33d,  3  20a,  19  3b,  21  4a  9b, 
23  7c  8c  16c,  25  3c  5c,  40  12b,  *48  3c,  51  2a,  53  5c,  *59  7a;  ix  70 
8a,  73  Id  2d,  74  2d,  84  2c,  86  18c  21b,  92  5d,  94  4a,  97  19c,  103  5c, 

110  8b;  x  [6  la  lc],  *12  Id  *8c,  *27  3c,  31  4d,  48  2b,  50  3b,  *56 
4b,  61  5d  6a  7a  7d  13c,  69  10a,  74  3d,  [78  6d],  91  10b,  92  14c,  *94  4c, 
99  Id,  *107  lb,  115  5d,  *117  7d,  124  7b,  *129  4c,  138  4b,  *149  4a. 

(c)  Syllables  not  final:  i  36  16c,  39  10c,  47  lc,  48  8c,  56  6a  6c, 
[61  lc,  68  4b],  83  4a,  87  2a,  88  2c  6a,  91  23b,  96  Id  =  2d  =  3d,  100  6c, 

111  4a,  112  5a  15c,  118  7d,  121  M\  122  lid,  126  4c,  134  3b,  138  If, 
144  7c,  145  4b,  149  3c,  151  Id,  154  2c,  158  lc,  169  la,  173  12b2,  174 
9a,  *179  lb,  186  6d;  iii  5  2b,  6  6b,  20  5d,  30  10c;  iv  6  lc  9c, 
16  16c,  17  3d  14b,  23  6d,  24  2d,  29  2b  4c,  33  lc,  35  7a,  41  9c;  v  27 
3b,  30  14b,  41  17a,  45  7a,  53  2c,  56  3c  6c;  vi  9  5a,  11  lc3,  12  5d, 
15  2a,  20  5c  lie,  23  10c,  25  5d,  46  13c  14c,  49  6b,  50  6a,  52  15a,  63 
3b  6c  7d,  66  4c,  68  lc  2c,  *75  7a;  vii  4  2c2,  12  Id,  19  10a,  38  2a, 
*49  lb;  viii  1  10c  30c,  4  lc  14a,  15  9c,  19  12a  29a,  20  lib,  23  9c 
lie,  24  23c,  25  7c,  26  7c  8c,  29  9a,  33  9c  lie  13c,  49  10a,  52 
4c,  54  6a,  70  lc,  97  14a;  ix  81  lc,  88  3d  4c,  103  2c,  108  10a, 
111  3f ;  x  2  7c,  *13  3c,  23  3d,  31  7c,  48  9b,  49  11a,  *56  4d,  64  5c, 
69  9c,  79  2a,  *83  3b,  *88  6c,  89  4a,  93  8a  14b,  *94  10b,  *95  4a  *13a, 
*101  3b,  105  3c,  115  2d  7a,  *120  6a,  *130  7a,  144  2c  5a,  148  la,  160 
lb,  *164  3a. 

1  §  151  i.  2  §  151  iii.  "»  §  150  i. 

(d)  It  will  be  convenient  to  record  here  the  instances  in  which  a 
final  vowel  in  the  eighth  place  is  '  protracted '  or  otherwise  of  doubtful 
quantity:  namely  i  31  5c,  32  5c,  33  13b,  48  12c,  73  9b,  94  lb 
Id  =  2d  =  3d  4a,  116  24a,  117  21c,  132  lb  If,  145  la,  *164  30d  *38b, 
165  7c,  189  3a1;         ii  2  10b,  9  3c,  23  13d,  26  2a1,  33  2d  4a,  37  3b; 

iii  31   12c,  32  2c,  33  10a,  53  5b,  60  5b;         iv  [10  Id],  *18  5b,  34 
8c,  39  3d,  *58  2a  *2b ;         v  1  5d,  3  6a,  42  6b,  45  5b  6a  6d ;         vi  1 


204  Short  tenth  syllable 

6b  9c,  25  3d1,  32  2a,  41  5c,  [44  9c1];  vii  1  3a1,  18  17b  24b,  25 
2a1  2c1,  27  5b,  57  4c,  *103  2d  ;  viii  15  12c,  29  2a,  *48  9b,  60 
6a1 ;  ix  70  2b  9d,  80  lc  4d,  84  5d,  90  4b,  91  4b1,  96  17c,  97  44b 
44d;  x  2  2c,  5  5b,  *42  lOd,  56  3a,  63  lOd  14d,  67  6b,  80  7b,  *88 
4b,  111  lc  2c  2d  4c,  112  3d,  *139  4b,  148  Id,  *180  lc  *2b,  *181  Id. 
1  Imperative  in  -did,  -hi. 

(ii)  Short  tenth  syllable  :  i  36  10a  12a,  39  3c,  57  3d,  58  2a1  4d], 
60  4c2,  [61  Id3],  62  3d  5a,  [70  9a],  77  3b4,  85  3c,  87  5d,  89  lc  *10c5, 
91  21c,  100  16c4,  103  4d,  104  3b,  111  3a,  112  11a,  121  la  9d,  122  10d8 
lid,  126  lc,  127  3f  4b6  5f  7b  9fa,  129  lb  6f  10b6,  134  3a,  135  4a6,  140 
13c,  141  12b4,  143  3d4,  145  2d,  149  lb2,  158  5a3,  166  2a,  167  lb3  2c 
5b,   168  2a,  169  5a3,   173  7c8  8d5  lib,  174  9a,  181  lb,  186  2d  8c4  9c; 

ii  1  3b  10a,  2  9d,  4  lb  3d2,  19  lb  Id  3a  6a  6c,  20  lb4  2b5  6b3,  26  f4c7, 
29  la,  30  lc  6a,  35  lib;         iii  1  5c,  2  5d,  20  5d,  *29  7c,  46  2d5; 

iv  1  2b  19c,  2  14c,  4  3a3  10c,  12  lb,  13  3a,  16  lb  20b4,  17  18a,  34 
fid10,  38  9a5,  39  2d ;  v  2  Id  4c  7b,  31  5c4,  33  2d5  3b  5a  5b4 10c,  37  3b, 
41  4d3  lOd  15d  16e,  53  lb,  57  6d,  87  6a  9a ;  vi  1  12c,  3  6b,  4  7d3, 
8  5c1,  10  5d5  6a,  11  4d5,  13  lb  Id  2a  5d,  15  3b  5d\  17  12b,  19  6a,  20 
lb5  Id  3b,  24  3a  3c  4b  7c  10b  10c,  25  la  6a,  29  4d3,  33  3d3  5d3,  37  4b3 
5b,  38  la3,  40  5a,  44  lid,  48  4c6  18a,  49  12d  15c5,  50  2a  3a  7c3  11a, 
51  lib5,  62  5a3  9a,  63  3b3,  64  5b,  65  2b4,  66  5a  7b4,  67  la3  3c5  lid,  68 
5d5  7d ;  vii  3  5b,  32  10c,  34  24b,  42  4c2,  *50  4a,  69  7c,  76  id,  92  la, 
93  5c  6a,  101  2a,  *103  10a;  viii  1  16c6  30c,  15  10c,  18  15c,  19  4c 
14a  23b  32b6,  20  20a,  21  2c,  22  16c6,  25  10c,  27  5c,  36  4a,  61  4c6  8c 
17c,  66  10a,  70  2a6  8c,  71  15c,  97  10c;  ix  70  3c  5d,  79  lb,  88  lc, 
89  3b,  93  4a,  94  la  lb  3a,  96  2c  4b  15c,  97  lb  26d3,  104  2c,  108  10c 
14a;  x  [1  7a],  3  lc  5b  6a  6c3,  [6  6c3],  12  4c,  22  4a,  39  14b4,  50  3a 
5a  6b,  61  la,  65  12d,  68  3a  lie,  74  2d,  78  7d,  93  5b  9a,  *95  3d  *4b 
♦lie,  *98  3b,  99  4c  7b,  105  la  7c  10c2,  *108  8a,  115  4a1  5b,  *129  f7b9, 
148  4b,  *164  3a. 

1  ajdra.         2  ddma  a,  or  similar  phrase.  3  superlative  in  -tama.         4  rdtha. 

jdna.  6  dvasc  or  dvasd.  7  text  rdkmti  ri.sdh  (§  175  i)  :  rdkmtlm  is  a  quite 


vii  2  lc,  8  6d,  28  4d,  [34  lib  14b],  38  6a  7c, 
42  la,  52  3a,  [56  5b  6a],  63  3c,  68  lc,  93  7b;  viii  20  4a  24a,  22 
15b,  24  26c,  26  24c,  46  26c,  60  8a;  ix  93  lc,  [109  3b  10a  lib  15a: 
x  6  2b],  *11  8d,  *12  5c,  23  4b,  40  5b,  [46  5bJ,  49  Id  9b,  50  4c,  55 
8a,  73  9b,  74  lc,  76  2b,  *87  19c,  93  14a,  105  6a2,  106  5a,  115  5c,  *121 
7b  *8b,  *165  3c. 

1  taatdmbhat.  2  but  see  §  244  iii. 

(iv)     Long  eleventh  syllable:  viii  25  17c,  [x  78  3c]. 

(v)     Long  ninth  syllable  combined  with  some  other  irregularity : 
(a)  -  -  «  *  or  -  -  w  v,  *,  i  48  4c,  59  4a,  63  4a,  [67  2b],  89  6a,  100  8c, 


Short  syllables  bearing  the  ictus  205 

121  8c,  122  10b ;       iii  58  6b ;       iv  26  6b;       vi  29  2c,  63  2c,  68  2a ; 

[ix  109  21a]  ;  x  74  4c,  115  5a.  (b)  w  -  -  *  or  «  -  -  „  w,  i  122 
11a;         vi  1  4d,  4  4c,  11  3a,  20  4a,  26  7a,  46  12c,  48  17c1,  60  3a- 

vii  21  9a  ;  viii  22  2c ;  x  [6  lb],  61  14d,  *83  5c,  93  7a,  133  7a, 
*142  lb,  *167  4d.     (c)u-^or.-v^^v415b;         vi  12  6c; 

[ix  109  18b]  ;         x  30  13a2,  61  2c  17a. 

1  §  151  i.  2  see  Metrical  Comm. 

(vi)  Long  eleventh  syllable  combined  with  some  other  irregularity: 
i  168  lb;         ii  22  lg  =  2g  =  3g;         viii  20  9b. 


221.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  as  a  whole  the 
employment  of  short  syllables  to  bear  the  ictus:  that  is  to  say, 
short  syllables  in  positions  in  which  long  syllables  are  regularly 
required,  and  which  are  immediately  followed  in  each  case  by 
another  short  syllable  within  the  same  part  of  the  verse.  Short 
syllables  are  thus  vised  in  every  possible  position ;  that  is,  in  the 
second  and  sixth  places  in  dimeter  verse,  and  in  the  second,  fourth, 
eighth  and  tenth  places  in  trimeter  verse.  Details  are  given  in 
the  Table  below  :  with  regard  to  the  second  place  no  distinction 
is  made  between  dimeter  and  trimeter  verse. 

It  first  appears  that  in  the  archaic  period  these  variations  are 
about  equally  common  in  each  position  :  that  is  to  say,  the  short 
vowel  is  found  in  about  3  per  cent,  of  the  verses.  But  even  in 
this  period  there  is  a  distinction  in  usage  :  for  in  the  second  and 
eighth  place  the  second  syllable  in  half  the  instances  contains  a 
final  vowel,  the  proportion  being  much  larger  than  chance  can 
account  for:  whereas  in  the  fourth,  sixth  and  tenth  places  the 
short  syllable  is  generally  initial  or  medial. 

Short  syllables  in  the  fourth,  sixth,  eighth  and  tenth  places 
rapidly  diminish  in  frequency  after  the  archaic  period,  though  in 
varying  degrees.  To  this  there  is  only  one  exception :  short 
eighth  syllables  which  contain  a  final  consonant  are  more  common 
in  the  strophic  than  in  the  archaic  period.  This  is  probably  due 
to  the  influence  of  the  secondary  caesura  (§  213). 

Short  syllables  in  the  second  place  only  slightly  diminish  in 
frequency  in  the  strophic,  normal,  and  cretic  periods,  and  are 
again  more  common  in  the  popular  period.  The  relation  between 
final  short  vowels  and  other  short  syllables  remains  uniform 
throughout.  In  this  point  therefore  no  historical  developement 
is  perceptible  within  the  period  of  the  Rigveda. 


206 


Syllabic  variations  of  the  cadence 


It  has  appeared  previously  (§  188)  that  in  dimeter  verse  there  is  a 
distinct  reduction  in  the  number  of  irregular  openings  after  the  archaic 
period.  This  reduction  seems  not  to  extend  to  trimeter  verse,  apparently 
for  the  reason  that  a  short  third  syllable  is  more  common  there.  How- 
ever the  movement  is  on  so  small  a  scale  that  it  does  not  seem  to  be 
worth  while  to  pursue  the  matter  further. 

The  table  further  shews  that  both  in  the  2nd  and  in  the  8th  place 
protraction  is  on  the  whole  more  common  in  the  later  periods  than 
elsewhere.  The  details  (proportionate  to  5000  verses)  have  already 
been  given  in  the  table  in  §  180.  Here  again  the  movement  is  on  so 
small  a  scale  as  to  have  little  practical  importance  :  so  far  as  it  goes,  it 
indicates  that  protraction  is  a  secondary  developement,  distinct  alike 
from  the  shortening  of  original  long  syllables  and  the  general  license  to 
throw  the  ictus  on  final  short  vowels,  but  much  more  closely  akin  to  the 
latter. 


222.  Table  of  short  syllables  bearing  the  ictus. 


Periods 

Archaic 

Strophic 

Normal 

Cretic 

Popular 

Second  place  (dim.  and  trim.): 
Final  short  vowels 
Other  short  syllables 
Protracted  vowels 

14 

15 

3 

12 

10 

3 

12 

11 
3 

11 

16 
13 

5 

Fourth  place  (trim,  late  caesura) 

26 

14 

14 

15 

17 

Sixth  place  (dimeter) 

38 

24 

17 

19 

13 

Eighth  place  (trimeter): 
Final  short  vowels 
Other  final  syllables 
Other  short  syllables 
Protracted  vowels 

19 
8 

12 
4 

13 

10 

9 

4 

9 
8 
3 
4 

4 
2 

4 
6 

4 
5 

4 
4 

Tenth  place  (trimeter) 

30 

7 

5 

4 

4 

The  figures  given  above  are  proportionate  to  each  1000  verses  of  the  same  kind : 
for  instance,  the  occurrences  in  the  fourth  place  before  late  caesura  are  propor- 
tionate to  the  number  of  verses  which  contain  a  late  caesura. 


223.  The  syllabic  variations  which  affect  the  cadence  are, 
like  all  other  irregularities,  much  more  common  in  the  archaic 
period  than  in  the  normal  groups.  Indeed  they  are  practically 
extinct  not  only  in  the  normal  period,  but  even  in  the  Vasistha 
hymns.  But  in  the  cretic  period  and  later  their  history  is 
peculiar.  'Catalectic  Jagati'  becomes  common  in  the  cretic  period, 
and  is  still  more  so  in  the  popular  Rigveda  :  '  extended  Tristubh,' 
though  unknown  in  the  cretic  period,  is  almost  as  common  in  the 


Catalectlc  Jagatl  207 

popular  hymns  as  catalectic  Jagatl.  Hypersyllabic  verses,  how- 
ever, are  not  found  in  either  of  these  periods. 

The  question  therefore  arises  whether  there  is  a  direct  histori- 
cal connexion  between  the  two  former  variations  as  occasionally 
found  in  the  archaic  period,  and  as  frequently  found  in  one  or 
both  of  the  later  periods.  Such  a  connexion  seems  highly  im- 
probable for  ■  extended  Tristubh '  verses,  in  view  of  the  great 
body  of  Tristubh  verse  in  which  no  such  variations  are  found : 
but  it  cannot  be  so  confidently  denied  for  the  '  catalectic  Jagatl ' 
variation,  since  in  the  intervening  periods  very  few  hymns  were 
composed  in  Jagatl  metre  at  all.  But  so  far  as  the  evidence  goes, 
the  '  catalectic  Jagatl '  verse  was  equally  extinct  in  this  period. 

We  seem  therefore  entitled  to  distinguish  two  sets  of  phe- 
nomena, which  accidentally  take  the  same  outward  shape,  namely 
(i)  syllabic  irregularity  of  the  cadence,  marking  the  archaic  period, 
and  (ii)  contamination  (a)  of  Jagatl  stanzas  by  Tristubh,  marking 
the  cretic  and  popular  periods,  and  (b)  of  Tristubh  stanzas  by 
Jagati,  marking  the  latter  only. 

In  accordance  with  the  presumed  origin  of  the  variations,  instances 
of  catalectic  Jagati  are  classified  below  as  occurring  (a)  in  lyric  hymns, 
mostly  in  the  archaic  period,  (b)  elsewhere  in  the  Rigveda  proper, 
principally  in  the  cretic  period,  and  (c)  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

Similarly  extended  Tristubh  verses  are  classified  as  occurring  (a)  in 
the  Rigveda  proper,  mostly  in  the  archaic  period,  and  (b)  in  the  popular 
Rigveda. 

(i)  '  Catalectic  Jagati '  is  found  in  the  second  verse  of  stanza  a 
(Kakubh),  and  in  the  second  verse  of  stanza  b  (Jagati)  below : 

(«)  md  no  hrnltam  dtithih 

vdsur  agnih  N  puruprasastd  esdh 

yah  suhota  su-adhvardh  viii  103   12. 

(b)  sdtyam  tad  indra-  \\  varuna  hrsdsya  vam 

mddhva  urmim  \\  duhate  saptd  vd?ilh 
idbhir  dasv&amp;msam  u  avatam  subhas  patl 
yd  vam  ddabdha  \\  abhi  ptiti  cittibhih  viii  59  3. 

The  use  of  the  term  '  Jagati '  for  the  trimeter  verses  that  occur  in 
lyric  metre  is  not  in  accordance  with  Indian  usage,  but  seems  con- 
venient for  the  present  purpose. 

Catalectic  Jagati  verses  are  found  as  follows :  (a)  frequently  in 
the  'uneven  lyric'  hymns  (§  186)  including  viii  35,  and  in  other 
lyric  stanzas  as  follows:  i  36  12a,  39  6c,  127  la  2a,  128  7f,  129  5f  8a, 
150  lc  3c;  v  87  9a;  vii  16  5c  lie,  32  25a;  viii  24  14c, 
25  18c,  26  22c,  46  20c  26a,  54  8a,  90  6c,   101  9c  10a,  103  6c  12b; 

ix  107  9c,  111  la;        x  126  5c.  (b)  in  Jagati  stanzas  in  the 


208  Extended  Tristubh 

Rigveda  proper :  i  35  3b  3d  9d\  101  5b,  102  2c,  110  6a  7a,  114  4a 
5c  5d  6d  8a  9b,  145  la  4b;    ii  1  16d,  3  6c,  16  5a,  25  5b,  37  4a; 

iii  2  lib,  26  6d,  53  16c;   v  44  10b;   vi  61  3c;    vii  41  Id; 

ix  70  la,  86  3a  48d ;  x  23  5a  5b,  35  10b,  36  6c,  37  6a,  44  7b, 
50  5c,  56  5b,  62  la  lc  2c  3b  3c  4c  lie  lid,  63  3b  10b  lie  14a,  64  7a, 
66  2a  10a  11a,  69  12c  12d,  75  7a  7b  8a  9b,  76  3b,  91  13d,  100  9b, 
115  5c  5d,  122  la  3b  3d  8d,  138  6b.  (c)  *in  the  popular  Rigveda: 
i  164  36a  41d;  ii  32  5b  5d ;  iv  58  lid;  vi  75  10a;  vii  50 
lb  2b  3a  3c,  104  3a  7a  7c  23d ;  viii  48  5c,  59  2a  3b  4b  5a ;  x  18 
13d,  53  10a,  84  4b  5b  5d  6c  7b  7d,  94  la,  117  2a,  125  2a. 

1  also  'hybrid'  verse,  §  229. 

(ii)  '  Extended  Tristubh  '  is  found  in  the  first  verse  of  the  following 
stanza : 

td  avadan  \\  prathamd  brahmakilhise 

dkupdrah  ^  salilo  mdtarisvd 

viMharas  \\  tdpa  ugro  mayobhuh 

dpo  devih  ||  pratharaajd  rtena  *x   109   t. 

Extended  Tristubh  verses  are  found  as  follows :  (a)  in  the 
Rigveda  proper:  i*  53  10a,  [61  11a],  114  11a,  140  10a,  180  4a  9c,  181 
5a;  ii  3  3c,  [11  3b],  18  2d;  iii  31  20c,  53  lie;  iv  19  5b,  55 
6c;  v  33  4d,  60  2c;  vi  13  5d,  25  3a,  47  18c  18d,  52  14a,  72  lb 
lc  2b  3b;        vii  4  6d,  54  Id,  59  8b,  92  5a;         ix  82  5c,  85  lie  12d  ; 

x  23  7c,  [46  7c],  96  lib,  99  4c,  113  10a.  (b)  *in  the  popular 
Rigveda :  i  24  15c,  93  8c  8d,  162  4d  6b  8a  8c  lib  12c  12d  14a  15c  21a 
22a  22b,  163  2a,  164  14a  14c  24c  39c  39d  44a  45b  47d  48c ;  ii  42 
Id  2c;  v  83  10c;  vi  47  29b  30c  31c,  74  Id,  75  7a  14d;  vii  103 
8a;  viii  100  12b;  x  10  14c,  14  la  10b  lib  12a  12b,  16  3b  3c  8a 
10a  10b,  17  2b  4c  12d,  18  10c  12a,  27  24c  24d,  34  5c,  51  8a  9a,  53  5c, 
59  5a  5c,  71  2b  2c  9c  9d,  81  3a  4c  4d  5a  7a,  82  6c,  85  18b  18d  27a 
27b  44d,  88  la,  94  14a,  95  3d  11a1  12d,  98  la  5d  7a  12a,  101  9a  9b, 
102  6c  lOd,  103  2a  2b  3a  4c  6b  8a2,  109  la  5a  5c,  114  la  2a  2b  3c  4c 
4d  5d  6b  lOd,  117  8a  8c,  120  9d,  121  3c,  125  4a,  128  7a  7c  8c,  129  3b, 
130  2c  2d,  149  2c,  161  la  4c,  165  lc  Id  4d,  168  2c,  182  la. 
1  §  142  ii.  &gt;  §  142  iii  6. 


224.  ' Hypersyllabic  verses'  containing  thirteen  syllables 
(Tristubh)  or  fourteen  syllables  (Jagati)  are  usually  formed  by  an 
extension  of  the  rhythm  of  the  cadence.  They  appear  to  be 
characteristic  of  the  archaic  period,  but  there  are  also  several 
occurrences  in  the  popular  Rigveda. 

The  following  are  examples  of  hypersyllabic  verses  : 

abhi  vo  wrdm  \{  dndhaso  mddesu  gay  a     viii  46  14a. 
ekah  swparndh  \\  sd  samudrdm  a  vivesa     *x  114  4a. 

Hypersyllabic  verses  are  numerous  in  the  hymn  viii  97  10-15, 
where  they  occur  as  10b1  13a1  13b  13c  13d  14b  15b  15d.  They  are 
also  found  as  follows :  i  88  lb,  133  6a  6f ;         iii  59  2d ;         iv  1  2a2; 


Varieties  of  the  '  rest '  209 

vi  10  lb,  15  14a,  26  2c  7c1,  52  14b3  14c;      *vii  104  15a;      viii  46 
14a,  90  5c2,  103  5a2;       *x  87  12b1  *13c1,  *114  4a,  *121  7c,  *139  4c1. 

1  Irregular  rhythm.  2  verse  of  14  syllables.  3  reading  apddm,  §  143  iii : 

otherwise  this  is  a  hybrid  verse,  §  229. 


225.  The  syllabic  variations  which  affect  one  part  of  the 
verse  only  have  already  been  discussed :  but  the  '  rests '  and 
1  hybrid  verses '  need  to  be  considered  separately,  as  they  involve 
difficulties  as  to  the  position  of  the  caesura  and  therefore  affect 
the  general  structure  of  the  verse.  We  have  taken  as  our  start- 
ing-point (§  94  iii)  the  view  that  the  '  rests '  generally  are  charac- 
teristic of  an  early  period  of  the  Rigveda  :  and  this  view  is  borne 
out  by  the  fact  that  they  are  comparatively  rare  in  the  popular 
Rigveda.  A  closer  examination  however  shews  that  the  rests  fall 
into  three  classes, ,  partly  according  to  the  rhythm  of  the  verses  in 
which  they  occur,  and  partly  according  to  their  use  in  the  Rig- 
veda, namely  (i)  verses  in  which  a  rest  is  associated  with  iambic 
rhythm  of  the  break,  the  rest  being  at  the  fifth  place,  and  the 
sixth  syllable  being  long ;  these  verses  are  chiefly  found  in  the 
decasyllabic  Tristubh  hymns,  and  are  of  the  Viratsthana  or  some 
similar  type :  (ii)  verses  agreeing  on  the  whole  with  the  normal 
trimeter  rhythm,  but  chiefly  found  in  decasyllabic  metres,  the 
types  being  the  Pentad  and  the  Bhargavi  verse :  and  (iii)  verses 
entirely  agreeing  with  the  ordinary  trimeter  rhythm,  but  having 
the  first  part  of  the  verse  defective  by  one  syllable.  Verses  of 
the  last  class  may  be  said  to  contain  '  neutral '  rests,  on  account  of 
their  lack  of  distinctive  character  :  they  are  found  most  frequently 
in  the  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh,  but  to  a  certain  extent  are 
spread  over  the  whole  Rigveda. 

The  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  and  those  in  decasyllabic 
metres,  if  examined  on  this  basis,  are  found  to  fall  into  two 
groups  which  do  not  exactly  correspond  to  the  differences  denoted 
by  the  titles.  All  the  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  are  alike 
in  shewing  a  free  admixture  of  regular  Tristubh  verses  with 
decasyllabic  verses  of  the  Viratsthana  and  neutral  types,  and 
also  a  very  high  proportion  of  other  archaic  variations.  The 
Viratsthana  and  Gautami  hymns  (ii  11,  i  61)  only  differ  from 
them  in  shewing  a  much  higher  proportion  of  decasyllabic  verses. 
These  hymns  must  necessarily  belong  as  a  whole  to  the  archaic 
period.  On  the  other  hand  the  Pentad  and  Bhargavi  hymns 
a.  14 


210  Doubtful  decasyllabic  verses 

consist  almost  exclusively  of  decasyllabic  verses  of  their  respective 
types,  and  have  comparatively  few  irregularities  of  any  other 
kind :  it  is  therefore  unlikely  that  they  are  earlier  than  the 
strophic  period. 

In  recording  variations  belonging  to  these  different  types  it  is  con- 
venient to  distinguish  the  occurrences,  according  as  they  are  found  (a) 
in  the  hymns  in  decasyllabic  metres ;  (b)  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh 
hymns ;  (c)  in  other  hymns  in  the  Rigveda  proper ;  or  (d)  in  the 
popular  Rigveda. 

The  lists  of  decasyllabic  verses  given  in  the  next  three  sections 
include  over  900  instances,  of  which  almost  400  are  in  the  decasyllabic 
metres,  about  250  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  verse,  the  same  number  in 
the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  Rigveda  proper,  and  about  50  in  the 
popular  Rigveda. 

Some  of  the  instances  are  open  to  question,  as  the  occurrences  of 
indra  in  the  Vasistha  hymns  (§  149  i).  On  the  other  hand  it  is 
probable  that  some  at  least  of  the  verses  for  which  resolution  has  been 
suggested  in  §§  142,  143,  149  ii-iv,  150  and  151  above  are  rightly  to  be 
explained  as  decasyllabic  verses.  Of  these  doubtful  cases  there  are 
about  100  in  the  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  alone,  as  shewn  in 
brackets  in  those  sections.  The  interpretation  chosen  will  therefore 
materially  affect  our  view  as  to  the  extent  to  which  the  system  of 
1  rests  '  is  carried. 

Even  on  the  lower  computation,  and  excluding  the  decasyllabic 
metres,  decasyllabic  verses  are  about  as  common  in  trimeter  verse  as  is 
hiatus  (§  131) :  and  there  is  therefore  no  abstract  reason  why  in 
individual  cases  we  should  prefer  the  one  explanation  to  the  other. 
The  rhythm  may,  however,  often  give  a  reason  for  a  preference  :  it 
should  at  least  be  a  general  rule  of  metrical  interpretation  that  '  hiatus 
or  resolution  should  not  be  postulated  in  order  to  bring  a  verse  up  to 
the  regular  number  of  syllables,  if  by  so  doing  irregular  rhythm  is 
introduced' 

This  rule,  as  already  observed,  is  opposed  to  the  interpretation 
indara  so  far  as  the  archaic  period  is  concerned. 

From  the  list  of  verses  containing  one  or  more  '  rests '  we  omit  the 
following,  because  the  rhythm  is  so  exceptional  that  it  becomes  very 
probable  that  errors  have  crept  into  the  text:  i  120  lc  6a  7b,  132  2b, 
*162  16c,  173  4a;  ii  19  5a;  iv  26  7a ;  v  41  9a;  vi  17  10c, 
50  9c ;  viii  46  16c  20a;  ix  110  10a ;  x  32  5b,  55  8d,  61  26a  27d, 
79  5b,  *95  4c,  105  8a,  112  6b,  132  la,  144  4c. 


226.  The  decasyllabic  types  which  have  iambic  rhythm  at 
the  break  are  (i)  the  Viratsthana  verse ;  (ii)  indra  following  an 
early  caesura  (§  149  i) ;  (iii)  the  GautamI  verse  (see  below);  and 
(iv)  verses  with  a  double  rest.  The  caesura  may  most  con- 
veniently be  reckoned  as  following  the  rest.  In  all  the  types  the 
seventh  syllable  is  more  often  short  than  long. 


The  Viratsthana  verse  211 

The  Viratsthana  type  is  very  common  in  the  hymn  ii  11,  and 
the  Gautami  verse  in  i  61  :  otherwise  these  verses  are  chiefly 
found  in  the  decasyllabic  Tristubh  hymns,  which  are  most  fre- 
quent in  the  collections  i  58-64  and  vi.  But  all  the  types  are 
occasionally  found  with  Jagati  cadence. 

(i)  The  Viratsthana  verse  has  a  rest  at  the  fifth  place,  and  a  long 
sixth  syllable.  Its  two  varieties  are  illustrated  by  the  following 
examples  : 

(a)    with  short  seventh  syllable 

rdsi  ksdyam  •  u  r&amp;si  mitrdm  asme         ii  11  14a. 
(6)    with  long  seventh  syllable 

dvdbhinad  •  \\  ukthair  vdvrdhdndh  ii  11  2d. 

(a)  Of  the  first  variety  there  are  106  occurrences,  as  follows : 
(a)  in  ii  11,  39  occurrences:  also  i  61  5c  lOd  lie  14d  15d;     vii  34  17a; 

x  6  lc  6d,  46  7d,  78  la  6c.  (b)  i  63  9c,  77  2c1  3b,  120  4a,  122  4d, 
135  5b2,  149  3a,  153  2a;  ii  19  3c  7c,  20  2c  4d  ;  iv  21  6c  7a  7c; 
v  41  16d,  45  9a ;  vi  20  2d  6c,  21  8b,  33  4c,  63  3a  6a,  66  3b ;  x  23 
4c2  6d,  49  Id2  3b2  5c\  61  2c  3d  17a,  99  2d,  148  2b.  (c)  i  58  8d,  62 
7d,  117  lb,  131  6f,  154  3a,  155  5b2,  165  14b;  iv  37  4b;  v  43 
14b;  vi  3  7b,  10  4a,  19  2d,  22  6c,  51  4a;  vii  1  15b,  28  3b,  56 
18a,  58  6a;       x  77  7a,  80  2c  4c,  111  10c.         (d)  *x  59  5c2. 

(b)  Of  the  second  variety  there  are  only  half  as  many  instances, 
occurring  as  follows :  (a)  in  ii  11,  11  times:  also  i  61  3d  4a  6a  8a  lid, 
68  2b;  vi  44  9a;  x  46  5d  6b  7c2.  (b)  i  60  lb,  63  5c,  127  7a, 
148  la,  173  5c,  174  9b;  ii  20  6d  ;  v  33  4d,  41  8b,  45  2b;  vi  21 
2b  6c,  63  2c;  x  61  16a,  99  7d  8d.  (c)  i  33  14c,  71  4b,  89  6b,  117 
lc,  121  6c,  140  13c;  iv  44  5d ;  vi  13  lc,  19  10b,  67  10a;  vii  6  2a, 
48  1a;     viii23  3c2;     ix  93  5c3;     x  30  9c.         (d)  *x  17  13a,  *120  lb. 

1  §  151  iii.  2  Jagati  verses.  3  but  see  §  170  ii/. 

(ii)  Decasyllabic  verses  in  which  indra  follows  early  caesura  are 
of  the  same  types  as  Viratsthana  verses,  as  illustrated  by  the  following 
examples  : 

(a)  yd  udfci  •  n  indra  devdgopah  i    53  11a. 

(b)  ydd  dha  syd  ta  •  \\  indra  srustir  dsti        i  178     la. 

(a)  Of  the  first  variety  there  are  98  occurrences,  as  follows :  (a)  ii 
11  la  2a  4c  7a  11a  14b  16d  20d;  x  6  6c.  (b)  i  63  la  to  9a,  104  2a 
8a,  129  la1  4a1,  167  la,  169  la  to  5a,  173  13a,  174  la  to  5a,  7a  to  10a, 
178  2a;  ii' 19  3a  8c;  v  33  4a  5a;  vi  20  1  la  13a,  21  8a,  24  10b, 
33  la,  35  2a  3a;  x  22  2a  11a1  12a  13a  15a,  50  3a  4a1,  61  22a,  93  11a1, 
148  2a  4a  5a.  (c)  i  33  14a,  53  11a,  100  17a,  133  6a,  165  3a,  177 
5a;       ii  17  8d ;       iii  32  12a;       iv  16  21a,  17  la,  19  la  2b,  50  11a; 

vi  22  3a  10a,  23  3a,  25  lb,  26  7b,  44  15a,  47  9a;  vii  19  2a  6a,  21 
5a  6a,  22  la  8c,  23  5a,  25  la,  29  la,  30  lb  4a,  92  4a;  viii  66  5c1,  97 
14a;       ix  88  la;       x  29  3a.  (d)  none. 

14—2 


212  The  Gautaml  verse 

(b)  Of  the  second  variety  there  are  only  35  occurrences,  as 
follows:  (a)  none.  (b)  i  129  H1  8b1,  167  10a,  173  5a  7c  10b  11a, 
178  la  3a  4a;  ii  19  lb,  20  4a  5b  6a  7a;  iv  21  10a;  vi  20  3b, 
21  2a,  24  la;        x  22  la,  23  la1,  49  11a,  50  2b1,  148  la.  (c)  i  89 

6^130  2^,186  60;  11313a1;  Hi  49  la;  iv  24  2b,  39  4d;  v  36 
la ;      vii  20  2a ;      viii  96  20a.         (d)  *x  139  4c. 

1  Jagati  verses. 

(iii)  The  name  '  Gautaml  verse '  is  suggested  to  describe  a  metre 
which  agrees  in  form  with  the  Viratsthana  verse,  except  that  the  rest 
precedes  an  early  caesura.  Such  verses  are  very  common  in  the 
Gotama  hymn  i  61  ;  in  the  occurrences  in  that  hymn  the  rhythm  of 

the  break  is  always  n ^,  the  seventh  syllable  being  therefore  short : 

but  it  is  probable  that  some  occurrences  with  long  seventh  syllable  in 
other  hymns  are  really  of  the  same  type,  and  therefore  also  to  be 
associated  with  the  Viratsthana  verse. 

The  two  forms  of  the  Gautaml  verse  may  therefore  be  illustrated 
by  the  following  examples  : 

(a)  bhdrdmi  •    n   dhgusdm  dsiena  i  61  3  b. 

(b)  brdvah  had  •    u   aryamne  kdd  bhdgaya         iv  3  5d. 

(a)     Occurrences  with  short  seventh  syllable:    (a)  i  61  Id  3b  4b1 
4c  10b  lib  13a  13b  13c.         (b)  i  77  5b,  148  2c;       ii  20  8b;       vi  24 
7d ;       x  132  3c.         (c)  i  147  lb ;       v  46  8b ;      vi  26  la2 ;      x  74  3c. 
(d)  none. 

(6)     Occurrences   with    long   seventh   syllable :    (a)  vi  44  7b  7c ; 
x  6  3a.  (b)  vi  20  2b.  (c)  i  138  2f3,  iv  3  5d  12c,  x  74  lb. 

(d)  none. 
1  Alternatively  with  hiatus,  §  123  b.  2  Alternatively  as  a  Pentad  verse. 

3  Jagati  verse. 

(iv)  The  majority  of  those  trimeter  verses  in  the  Rigveda  which 
have  only  nine  syllables  may  be  explained  as  Viratsthana  verses  with 
an  additional  rest  at  the  fourth  place.  The  following  verses  will 
illustrate  the  two  varieties  : 

(a)  vdyo  nd  ■  •  \\  paptatd  sumdydh  i    88  Id. 

(b)  aydm  sd  •  •  |(  hbtd  yb  dvijdnmd         i  149  5a. 

(a)  The  first  of  these  varieties  occurs  nine  times,  namely  (a)  ii  1 1 
3b18  15c.  (b)  i  129  11a12,  174  6a;       x  22  9a1,  61  24c.         (c)  i  33 

9a1,  88  Id;        viii  19  33a2. 

(6)  The  second  variety  occurs  six  times,  namely  (b)  i  149  5a,  173 
4c1 ;        x  49  2a1 2,  61  23a,  105  5a3.         (c)    i  88  2c. 

As  the  great  majority  of  these  instances  are  in  hymns  in  deca- 
syllabic Tristubh,  it  becomes  highly  probable  that  they  are  varieties  of 
Viratsthana  verse,  and  belong  to  the  archaic  period. 

1  indra  follows  the  caesura.  2  Jagati  verses.  3  but  see  §  244  iii. 

227.  The  decasyllabic  types  which  are  chiefly  found  in  dis- 
tinctive metres  are  the  Pentad  and  the  Bhargavi  verses. 

The  Pentad  verse  is  commonly  equivalent  to  a  Tristubh  verse 


The  Pentad  and  Bhargavl  verses  213 

with  rest  at  the  sixth  place :  but  each  part  of  the  verse  exercises 
an  influence  over  the  other,  with  the  result  that  the  third  syllable 
is  generally  short,  and  the  seventh  and  ninth  syllables  are 
often  long.  For  the  immediate  purpose  it  will  be  sufficient  to 
distinguish  two  varieties,  according  as  the  seventh  syllable  is 
short  or  long ;  the  other  characteristics  are  discussed  elsewhere. 

The  Bhargavl  verse  has  two  forms,  one  having  a  rest  in  the 
fifth  place,  and  the  other  one  in  the  sixth  place.  The  Bhargavl 
differs  from  all  other  decasyllabic  variations  in  being  based  upon 
Jagati  verse  :  it  is  therefore  strictly  speaking  a  '  hendecasyllabic ' 
variation.  One  of  its  forms  agrees  with  one  of  the  forms  of 
Pentad  verse,  except  for  the  difference  in  the  cadence;  but  the 
resemblance  appears  to  be  accidental. 

Occasionally  we  may  find  examples  of  Pentad  rhythm  with 
Jagati  cadence,  and  of  Bhargavl  rhythm  with  Tristubh  cadence : 
but  these  examples  are  isolated,  and  no  importance  can  be 
attached  to  them  except  as  suggesting  emendation  of  the  text. 

Both  in  Pentad  and  in  Bhargavl  verse  the  rest  appears  to 
follow  the  caesura:  upon  this  assumption  each  type  in  its  more 
common  variety  agrees  with  normal  trimeter  rhythm.  Examples 
of  '  double  rests '  can  be  found,  but  are  rare. 

(i)  The  Pentad  verse  occurs  about  170  times  with  short  seventh 
syllable,  and  130  times  with  long  seventh  syllable.  The  great  majority 
of  these  occurrences  are  in  the  Dvipada  Yiraj  hymns  (§  94  iii  b) :  in  the 
hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  verses  of  this  type  play  a  comparatively 
small  part.  The  two  varieties  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following 
examples : 

(a)  tdkvd  nd  bhurnir  u  •  vdnd  sisakti  i  66  2c. 

(b)  dddhdra  ksemam  M  •  bko  nd  ranvdh        i  66  3a. 

(a)  Occurrences  with  short  seventh  syllable :  (a)  i  65-70,  62 
times;         ii  11  17d  ;         vi  44  8c;         vii  34  i— «,  26  times,  56  i-n, 

13  times;        ix    109,  18  times;       x    1   6c1,  6  6  times,  46   11  times. 

(b)  i  153  la,  174  3d  ;  v  41  15c ;  vi  63  2b,  66  3c,  68  5c ;  x  93 
12a,  99  8b.  (c)  i  62  8c ;  iv  3  lib  13d,  50  2c ;  v  15  5c  ;  vi  25 
Id,  67  11c;  vii  52  3c,  87  6b ;  ix916a;  x  45  8b,  73  3a,  89  8d, 
124  6c.         (d)  *x  83  3b,  *101  7a,  *120  Id  *4a. 

(b)  Occurrences  with  long  seventh  syllable:  (a)  i  61  15b,  65-70 
55  times;  ii  11   16a;         vi  44  7a  8a  8b  9b  9d ;         vii  34  1-21, 

14  times,  56  1-11,  5  times;  ix  109,  24  times;  x  1  Id  5b2  6b,  6 
6  times,  46  6d.  (b)   i  104  lb,  120  3b3,  149  2c  4a ;        v    41   19a; 

vi  24  6d,  66  6d;  x  99  8c.  (c)  i  130  10c;  iv26  7d;  vi  17 
7d,  67  10c;       vii  4  3b4,  6  3c.  (b)  *i  162  16d  ;       *x  114  10b. 

1  with  short  eighth  syllable.  2  reading  yajiid-yajnasya,  cf.  §  152  ii. 

3  transferring  mdnma  to  3a ;  but  see  §  244  ii.  4  §  151  iii. 


214  Neutral  rests 

For  the  quantity  of  the  third  syllable  see  below  §  249  :  the  instances 
of  a  long  ninth  syllable  have  already  been  enumerated  in  §  220  iii. 

Several  of  these  verses  may  also  be  interpreted  as  Gautami  verses : 
for  instance  vii  52  3c,  87  6b. 

(ii)  The  varieties  of  Bhargavi  verse  have  been  illustrated  in  §  52  : 
the  form  with  rest  at  the  sixth  place  only  differs  from  the  second  form 
of  Pentad  verse  in  the  cadence.  The  rhythm  is  that  of  the  normal 
trimeter  verse  after  early  caesura. 

(a)  Occurrences  with  rest  at  the  fifth  place  :  (a)  x  77  la  lb  lc1 
2b  2d  3a  3c  3d  4d  5b,  78  lb  Id  2c1  2d  3b  3c  3d  4b  4c  6d.         (c)  i  36  8c, 

48  4a,  100  6b;        vii  96  2c;        viii  27  12c. 

• 

(b)  Occurrences  with  rest  at  the  sixth  place  :  (a)  x  77  Id  2a  2c  3b 
4c,  78  4d.         (b)    i  129  9f.         (c)   i  83  6b,   112'  10b;        v  51  13a; 

vi  15  Id;        viii  52  4a2;        x  32  4c2. 

1  sixth  syllable  long.  2  fifth  syllable  long. 

(iii)  The  varieties  that  follow  bear  a  resemblance  to  the  Pentad 
or  Bhargavi  types,  but  are  too  scattered  to  be  of  historical  importance. 

(a)  Pentad  verses  with  short  seventh  syllable  and  Jagati  cadence: 
(c)  ii  24  5b,  36  la;  viii  98  7b;  ix  71  7c1,  79  lc.  (d)  *vi 
47  31c,  *x  56  4d. 

(b)  Bhargavi  verses  with  rest  at  the  fifth  place  and  Tristubh 
cadence:    (a)   i  61  6c,  70  10a;       x  6  2a.  (b)   i  122  3a,   173*  2c; 

v    33  2b.  (c)  i  100  5b,  117  22c,  130  lOd;      ii  18  la;      vii  75 

4a.       (d)  *x  14  5c. 

(c)  Pentad  verses  with  rest  before  and  after  the  caesura,  as 

sd  tudrh  na  •  n  •  arvan  nidayah         vi  12  6a. 

The  occurrences  are:    (b)  ii  20  3a,  x  61  27a.  (c)    ii  31  7c,  vi  12 

6a,  viii  96  21a1,  x  55  2c. 

(d)  Bhargavi  verse,  with  rest  before  and  after  an  early  caesura  : 

rdjdno  •  n  •  nd  citrdh  susamdfsah         x  78  lc. 
This  example  seems  to  stand  alone. 

1  with  short  eighth  syllable. 

228.  Verses  with  neutral  rest  are  such  as  have  the  latter  part 
of  the  verse  complete  and  of  the  ordinary  rhythm :  the  rest  there- 
fore must  be  considered  to  precede  the  caesura,  coming  either  at 
the  fourth  or  at  the  fifth  place,  as  in  §  226.  Any  textual  emen- 
dation which  will  add  a  syllable  to  the  first  part  of  the  verse  will 
have  the  effect  of  restoring  a  regular  trimeter  verse. 

The  two  varieties  are  illustrated  by  the  following  examples  : 
(i)     anjasi  •  ukulisi  virdpatni  i  104  4c. 

(ii)     dididno  •  ubhdvati  druhamtardh  i  127  3b. 


Hybrid  verses  216 

(i)  Neutral  rests  at  the  fourth  place:  (a)  i  61  11a1;  ii  11  3b 
7d.  (b)  i  60  4c,  104  4c,  120  la6  3c8,  122  6c  6da,  167  lc  7b',  169 
2c1  5c;  ii  4  3b  8b,  20  2a  2d ;  v  33  lc  2c,  41  17b,  45  Id;  vi  20 
7a,  24  3a  10d3,  30  la,  63  4c,  68  4d ;  x  23  5a4,  50  4c,  61  27c,  93  9a, 
99  6b4  lie,  105  3c  6c,  132  lb  7a.  (c)    i  48  3c1,  62  3a,  89  4b,  141 

8a,  158  3b,  180  3c,  184  5b5,  190  7c;  ii  2  la,  14  5b  5c,  15  7a,  31 
7b;  iv  25  la;  v  29  13b;  vi  4  8d3,  10  7b3,  12  6d3,  13  6d3,  15 
15c,  17  15b3,  29  2b,  48  17c;  vii  100  3a;  viii  46  17b,  49  4c, 
52  2a;  ix  86  43a,  107  9a;  x  31  6b,  79  3a,  92  14b,  112  lc. 
(d)  *vi  47  31b;  *x  16  8c,  *85  44c,  *94  11a,  *95  4a  *10a 
♦13c,  ♦lOl  10b1,  *130  la,  *\1Q  3b. 

1  The  verse  may  be  alternatively  explained  by  hiatus  or  resolution,  at  the  cost 
of  an  irregular  opening.  2  Supply  srotu  nah  to  begin  the  verse.  3^  Refrain 

verse  mddema....  4  with  irregular  break.  5  Alternatively  read  maniebhih. 

6  but  see  §  244  i  a. 

(ii)  Neutral  rests  at  the  fifth  place:  (a)  i  61  10a3;  ii  11  lOd  ; 
x  77  4b  5a,  78  4a.  (b)    i  127  3b2  9a2  10a2  10b2,  135  lb8, 

145  5a  5d,  148  4b,  167  6c,  173  10a,  174  2c  8c,  178  lc;  ii  4  5d 
9c;  iv  21  5c;  v  33  10a3,  41  5d  lOd  16e3 ;  vi  20  7b,  30  5a,  66 
9c  10c;  x  23  3c2  7b3,  50  5c,  61  25a,  105  lc.  (c)  i  39  3c2,  64  9a2, 
76  Id,  79  lc,  88  3c,  159  2a2,  180  6c,  186  3a  7c;  iii  23  4a,  53  24a, 
61  4b;  iv  1  19c,  2  2d,  3  14b,  4  lc,  16  15a4,  17  lc,  40  2c2;  v  30 
6a3,  57  8c;       vi  65  5a;       vii  5  la,  37  4a,  57  lb,  59  8c,  60  9b,  97  6a; 

viii  19  18a2,  24  17c2,  101  12a2;  ix  88  4c3;  x  3  la,  39  14b, 
63  15a2,  66  4b,  74  3a3,  78  8a1,  112  2a  7c,  113  7c2,  115  9c,  122  5a2  7d3. 

(d)  *i  161  14c,  *164  30a  #35b  *48c2 ;  *v  40  7a3  7c;  *x  12 
2a,  ^13  3c,  ♦H  8d,  »27  6c,  ^53  4c,  *84  4c,  *180  3a. 

1  §  152  i.  2  Jagati  verses.  3  In  these  verses  the  full  number  of  syllables 

may  be  obtained  at  the  cost  of  an  irregular  opening.        4  §  168  iii. 

(iii)  A  rest  following  an  early  caesura  gives  us  the  first  variety  of 
Bhargavi  verse  (§  227  iia):  and  a  rest  following  a  late  caesura  gives  us 
the  first  variety  of  Pentad  verse  (§  227  i  a). 


229.  '  Hybrid  verses '  (§  56)  are  most  common  in  the  popular 
Rigveda,  and  are  there  doubtless  to  be  explained  by  contamina- 
tion. But  there  are  also  a  few  examples  in  the  earlier  parts  of 
the  Rigveda,  and  particularly  in  the  decasyllabic  Tristubh  hymns. 
'  Hybrid '  Jagati  verses  are  very  rare. 

The  instances  are  :  (a)  none,  (b)  i  167  lb,  169  6c;  ii  4  8d;  x 
50  2c,  61  lc,  93  14b.  (c)  i  35  9d,  110  9b,  138  3f ';  vi  17  7b;  viii 
22  14c,  46  19c,  61  8c,  101  12c;  x  122  3b.  (d)  *i  161  8a1,  *164 
17a  *23d  *45d;  *ii  43  2c1;  ♦v  44  15a  #15b  *15c;  *vi  75 
18c ;  ♦viii  59  6a  *7a  *7d  ;  *x  28  lc,  *51  9a1,  #82  4b,  #87  14a, 
♦103  7a  *lla,  *128  8a,  *129  6b. 

1  Jagati  verses. 


216  Table  of  syllabic  variations 

230.     Table  shewing  the  use  of  the  Syllabic  Variations. 


Archaic 

Stroph. 

Normal 

Cretic 

Pop. 

Decas. 

Decas. 

else- 

Refer 
to  § 

metres 

Trif&amp; 

where 

Number  of  verses 

516 

1525 

3865 

2621 

6554 

5225 

3463 

226  i 

Viratsthana  (short  7th) 

1061 

982 

22 

3 

}2 

1 

2 

1 

,»    i 

(long  7th) 

55 

41 

11 

5 

„    ii 

indra  (short  7th) 

98 

17 

103 

3 

}5 

2 

1 

0 

»,    " 

„      (long  7th) 

33 

0 

43 

1 

h   «i 

GautamI  (both  forms) 

26 

23 

4 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

„    iv 

Double  rests 

16 

4 

7 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

227  i 

Pentad  (short  7th) 

165 

294 

6 

1 

l» 

1 

1 

2 

m    i 

„        (long  7th) 

132 

242 

6 

1 

„    ii 

Bhargavl  (early  caesura) 

27 

41 

2 

5 

1.1. 

o 

2 

o 

n    ii 

„          (late  caesura) 

14 

12 

— 

5 

Neutral  rests : 

228  i 

at  the  fourth  place 

85 

8 

25 

4 

2 

1 

1 

3 

»    " 

at  the  fifth  place 

86 

12 

17 

4 

2 

2 

2 

3 

229 

Hybrid  verses 

35 

0 

2 

2 

0 

0 

1 

6 

1  In  this  column  the  absolute  number  of  occurrences  is  given. 

2  From  this  point  the  number  of  occurrences  is  proportional  to  each  1000 
trimeter  verses:  except  that  Pentad  variations  are  proportional  to  each  1000 
Tristubh  verses,  and  Bhargavl  variations  to  each  1000  Jagati  verses. 

231.  It  is  now  possible  to  define  more  accurately  the  charac- 
teristics of  trimeter  verse  in  each  period  of  the  Rigveda,  and  to 
use  these  characteristics  for  a  revision  of  our  provisional  arrange- 
ment of  the  hymns,  by  examining  the  extent  to  which  they  appear 
in  a  series  of  groups  of  hymns  much  smaller  than  those  used  in 
§  204  as  the  starting-point  of  this  investigation. 

In  drawing  up  a  list  of  the  characteristics  of  each  period,  it 
must  be  borne  in  mind  (i)  that  most  of  the  marks  of  the  archaic 
period  are  also  found,  though  much  less  commonly,  in  the  strophic 
period :  (ii)  that  the  marks  of  the  popular  Rigveda  are  to  some 
extent  anticipated  in  the  cretic  period:  (iii)  that  the  character- 
istics of  the  intermediate  periods  are  not  such  as  are  peculiar  to 
them,  but  such  as  are  more  freely  used  in  each  of  them  than  in 
other  periods.  Even  the  evidence  for  the  archaic  and  popular 
periods  must  be  used  with  care  in  dealing  with  small  groups  of 
hymns,  for  instance  such  as  contain  less  than  500  trimeter  verses : 
but  the  evidence  for  the  intermediate  periods  is  only  a  slight 
indication  of  date  except  when  the  groups  are  much  larger. 


Metrical  criteria  of  date  217 

Subject  to  these  qualifications,  the  characteristics  of  the  respec- 
tive periods  may  be  summed  up  as  follows : 

(i)  chiefly  in  the  archaic  period  we  find  (a)  the  weak  caesura, 
either  after  the  third  syllable  or  in  a  compound  (§  214):  (b)  the 
iambic  and  irregular  forms  of  the  break  (§  218):  (c)  irregularities 
in  the  rhythm  of  the  cadence  (§  220) :  (d)  decasyllabic  verses 
with  iambic  rhythm  (§  226)  or  with  neutral  rests  (§  228).  From 
(a),  (b)  and  (c)  verses  with  secondary  caesura  (§  213)  must  be 
excepted. 

(ii)  the  strophic  period  is  marked  by  the  frequency  of  the 
verses  in  which  'secondary  caesura'  is  found  (§  213). 

(iii)  in  the  strophic  and  normal  periods  the  Pentad  opening 
*  -  ^  —  I,  is  more  common  than  elsewhere. 

(iv)  in  the  cretic  period  the  cretic  break  „  -  w  -,  and  to  a  less 
extent  the  syncopated  opening  ^  ^  —  (j,  obtain  prominence. 

(v)  in  the  popular  Rigveda  the  rhythm  is  almost  the  same  as 
in  the  cretic  period,  but  the  following  syllabic  variations  occur  : 
(a)  extended  Tristubh  verses  (§  223  i);  (6)  catalectic  JagatI  verses 
(§  223  ii);  and  (c)  '  hybrid '  verses  (§  225). 

232.  The  smaller  groups  to  which  these  tests  are  applied 
may  be  either  subdivisions  of  the  large  groups,  or  smaller  groups 
outside  them  united  by  their  character  or  position.  Subdivision 
of  the  homogeneous  Mandalas  iii,  iv,  vi,  vii,  and  even  of  the  group 
x  29-80  shews  that  the  separate  parts  (as  for  instance  the  Agni 
hymns,  the  Indra  hymns,  the  hymns. to  other  deities)  are  prac- 
tically identical  in  rhythm,  and  therefore  it  is  unnecessary  to  give 
details  here.  The  most  important  groups  united  by  their  character 
are  the  hymns  in  the  different  lyric  metres.  Small  groups  united 
by  position  are  found  in  all  parts  of  the  Rigveda  outside  the 
homogeneous  Mandalas :  and  in  Mandalas  vi  and  vii  the  presumed 
later  additions  form  groups  of  some  importance. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  give  here  a  list  of  the  hymns  in  each  of  the  57 
small  groups  examined,  as  the  contents  are  sufficiently  indicated  in  the 
Table  in  §  235.  To  each  of  the  small  groups  are  prefixed  the  results 
for  the  larger  groups  of  Chapter  III,  so  that  the  homogeneity  of  the 
larger  groups  can  at  once  be  tested.  The  division  of  the  hymns  of  the 
popular  Rigveda  into  small  groups  is  of  an  artificial  character,  since 
only  the  hymns  x  10-18  form  a  natural  group. 


218  Reviev)  of  the  trimeter  groups 

233.  The  following  are  the  principal  results  of  this  investiga- 
tion, as  shewn  by  the  Table  in  §  235. 

The  three  principal  groups  of  the  archaic  period  have  on  the 
whole  the  same  metrical  character,  but  this  character  is  least 
pronounced  in  Group  III.  Amongst  the  smaller  groups  the  Usnih, 
Kakubh-Satobrhati,  and  uneven  lyric  hymns,  the  decasyllabic 
Tristubh  hymns  of  Mandalas  ii  and  vi,  and  the  group  x  48-50 
(in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  and  JagatI)  have  the  most  marked 
archaic  character,  variations  occurring  in  every  third  or  fourth 
verse.  The  hymns  in  Atyasti  and  Brhati-Satobrhati,  the  deca- 
syllabic Tristubh  hymns  of  the  groups  i  165-190  and  of 
Mandala  x,  the  hymns  of  the  group  i  58-64,  and  the  remainder 
of  the  Bharadvaja  hymns  have  archaic  variations  once  in  every  fifth 
verse.  On  the  other  hand  the  hymns  of  Mandala  v,  of  the  group 
i  76-92,  and  the  hymns  of  the  Mana  family  (i  165-190)  other 
than  the  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  do  not  shew  any  large 
proportion  of  archaic  variations :  and  the  two  latter  use  the  Pentad 
opening  as  freely  as  the  hymns  of  the  normal  period. 

In  the  strophic  period  all  the  groups  agree  in  shewing  the 
archaic  variations  about  once  in  every  eight  verses :  but  the  use 
of  secondary  caesura  is  confined  to  the  Vasistha  hymns  and  one 
or  two  of  the  smaller  groups :  in  the  Kanva  hymns  there  is  no 
trace  at  all  of  this  variation. 

In  the  normal  period  several  of  the  groups  diverge  from  the 
general  standard.  The  Vamadeva  hymns  (Mandala  iv)  have  as 
many  of  the  archaic  variations  as  the  hymns  of  the  preceding 
period :  the  hymns  of  Mandala  ix  shew  special  favour  to  the 
Pentad  opening:  the  group  i  116-119,  and  (to  a  lesser  extent) 
the  third  Mandala  combine  secondary  caesura  with  the  cretic 
break. 

The  groups  of  the  cretic  period  shew  a  remarkable  agreement 
in  all  particulars,  the  general  rhythm  being  very  strict  in  all  the 
groups,  and  the  cretic  break  being  used  once  in  every  four  or 
five  verses. 

The  hymns  of  the  popular  period  present  no  new  feature  of 
interest. 

234.  Since  it  appears  that  the  secondary  caesura  is  entirely 
absent  from  some  of  the  groups  of  the  strophic  period,  which  yet 


Parallel  developements 


219 


agree  in  other  points,  we  must  necessarily  conclude  that  the 
metre  in  this  period  followed  two  parallel  lines  of  developement, 
one  only  of  these  being  characterized  by  the  secondary  caesura. 
The  general  characteristic  of  the  period  must  then  be  defined  as 
the  use  of  the  archaic  variations  to  a  smaller  extent  than  is  found 
in  the  archaic  period. 

By  this  definition  the  following  small  groups  will  properly 
be  assigned  to  that  branch  in  the  strophic  period  which  is  free 
from  secondary  caesura:  the  Gotama  group  i  76-92,  the  Mana 
group  i  165-190  (excepting  the  decasyllabic  hymns),  the  Brhatl- 
Satobrhatl  hymns  of  Mandala  vii,  the  Kanva  hymns,  and  perhaps 
also  those  of  Mamateya.  It  seems  also  probable  that  Mandala  iv 
(Vamadeva  hymns)  should,  as  a  whole,  be  assigned  to  this 
branch  of  the  strophic  period.  The  second  branch  will  consist 
of  the  Tristubh  hymns  of  Mandala  vii  and  the  group  i  55-57. 

The  same  division  into  two  branches  will  then  be  perceived 
in  the  normal  period,  the  hymns  in  Mandalas  ii,  v  and  ix  being 
free  from  secondary  caesura,  whilst  those  in  Mandala  iii  and  the 
group  i  116-119  retain  the  principal  form  of  secondary  caesura 
and  discard  some  of  its  rarer  forms  (see  subsection  iii  a  below). 
In  this  group  i  116-119  the  developement  of  the  ere  tic  break  is 
also  very  marked. 

The  general  developement  of  trimeter  metre  appears  therefore 
such  as  may  be  indicated  as  follows : 

1.     Archaic  hymns 

( Lyric  metres  generally 

•j  Bharadvaja  (vi) 

( Decasyllabic  hymns  of  bks.  ii,  v  and  x. 


2.     Strophic  hymns 

,  Gotama  (i  76-92) 
Mana  (i  165-190) 
\  Vasistha  (Br.-Sat.  hymns) 
j  Kanva 
VYJimadeva  (iv) 


4.     Normal  hymns 

{Mandala  ii 
Mandala  v 
Soma  hymns  (ix  68-97). 


3.    Strophic  hymns  with  secondary  caesura 
(Vasistha  (Tristubh  hymns) 
{Group  i  55-57 


5.     Cretic  hymns  with  secondary  caesura 
( Group  i  116-119 
"(Kusika  (iii). 


6.  Cretic  hymns. 

7.  Popular  Rigveda. 


220  Small  trimeter  groups 

This  genealogy  is  of  course  suggested  with  every  reserve  :  but 
it  is  quite  consistent  with  the  general  view  of  the  history  of  dimeter 
verse  obtained  in  §  201. 

If  the  indications  of  metre  are  followed  out  in  further  detail  as  a 
matter  of  speculative  interest,  the  following  points  have  some  pro- 
babilities to  recommend  them  : 

(i)  (a)  In  the  archaic  period  the  Atyasti  hymns,  chiefly  found  in 
the  group  i  127-139,  and  the  Brhati-Satobrhati  hymns,  chiefly  found  in 
Mandalas  vi  and  viii,  are  not  so  early  in  date  as  the  other  lyric  metres. 
For  the  results  of  the  similar  investigation  of  the  dimeter  verses  in  the 
lyric  metres  see  §§  187,  201  ii,  iii. 

(b)  The  group  viii  35-37  contains  so  few  trimeter  verses  that  the 
metrical  indications  cannot  be  trusted.  So  far  as  they  go  they  revive 
the  doubt  already  expressed  in  §  105  iii  as  to  the  real  antiquity  of 
these  hymns.  It  will  perhaps  be  best  to  refer  them  to  the  strophic 
period. 

(c)  In  all  the  groups  into  which  the  large  Group  III  is  divided  the 
question  arises  whether  the  hymns  in  decasyllabic  Tristubh  are  really 
of  the  same  date  as  the  remainder.  Wherever  the  bulk  is  sufficient  to 
enable  us  to  examine  the  two  sets  of  hymns,  we  find  that  the  deca- 
syllabic Tristubh  hymns  have  a  much  larger  proportion  of  archaic 
variations.  This  result  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  the  decasyllabic 
variations  themselves  are  not  included  in  the  case  of  these  hymns.  It 
seems  therefore  probable  that  these  groups  are  not  entirely  homogeneous, 
though  the  evidence  may  not  always  be  sufficient  to  justify  us  in  naming 
particular  hymns  as  later  in  date. 

(ii)  (a)  In  the  strophic  period  there  is  a  considerable  divergence 
in  the  proportion  of  archaic  variations  between  the  three  groups  of 
Kanva  hymns :  but  the  number  of  trimeter  verses  is  so  small,  and  the 
agreement  in  other  matters  so  close,  that  we  should  not  be  justified  in 
separating  them.  If  we  take  the  three  groups  together  the  percentage 
of  archaic  variations  is  17,  which  is  distinctly  lower  than  that  of  the 
Brhati-Satobrhati  hymns  in  Group  I,  but  agrees  closely  with  the  results 
for  the  Brhati-Satobrhati  hymns  of  Mandala  vii.      Cf.  §  201  iii. 

(b)  The  great  frequency  of  the  secondary  caesura  in  the  Vasistha 
Tristubh  hymns  stands  in  striking  contrast  to  its  entire  absence  in  the 
Brhati-Satobrhati  hymns  of  the  same  Mandala.  The  Pentad  opening 
is  also  much  more  common  in  the  Tristubh  hymns  than  in  those  in 
Brhati-Satobrhati.  It  is  perhaps  not  impossible  that  a  single  poet 
should  have  introduced  these  variations  into  one  metre  without  em- 
ploying them  in  the  other  :  but  it  seems  more  probable  that  a  difference 
in  time  should  account  for  the  divergence.  Upon  this  supposition  we 
must  assign  the  earlier  date  to  the  lyric  hymns.  The  Mamateya  group 
i  141-158  does  not  employ  the  secondary  caesura,  but  it  has  very 
commonly  the  Pentad  opening  :  in  both  respects  it  agrees  closely  with 
the  Vamadeva  hymns,  which  we  have  now  brought  into  the  strophic 
period. 


Small  trimeter  groups 


221 


(iii)  (a)  In  the  normal  groups  as  a  whole  secondary  caesura  is 
extremely  rare :  its  frequency  in  the  group  i  116-119  and  in  the  third 
Mandala  is  the  more  remarkable.  If  we  compare  the  four  separate 
forms  of  secondary  caesura  in  the  Vasistha  hymns  and  in  these  groups, 
we  arrive  at  the  following  results  for  each  100  verses  : 


No.  of  verses 

Secondary  caesura  accompanied  by 
caes.  after  3rd       II w          *•  1  -  **          - 

i- 

Vasistha 
i  116-119 
iii 

1615 

184 

1418 

1                    4 
0                    2 
0                    1 

10 
18 

7 

2 
3 
1 

The  groups  i  116-119  and  iii  therefore  only  employ  two  of  the  four 
forms  that  are  used  in  the  Vasistha  hymns,  that  is  the  forms  in  which 
the  caesura  follows  the  fifth  syllable  :  these  are  used  in  the  group  i  1 16— 
119  much  more  commonly  than  elsewhere,  but  in  the  third  Mandala 
less  commonly.  This  is  consistent  with  the  view  that  the  Vasistha 
group  is  the  earliest  of  the  three. 

(b)  In  almost  all  the  groups  of  the  normal  period  the  cretic  varia- 
tions are  distinctly  more  common  than  in  the  preceding  periods,  and 
thus  the  favour  shewn  to  these  forms  is  to  some  extent  anticipated. 
On  the  other  hand  the  favour  shewn  to  the  Pentad  opening  varies 
considerably  both  in  the  strophic  period  and  in  this. 

(c)  The  small  group  i  71-73  is  singularly  featureless  :  but  it  is  at 
least  clear  that  it  has  nothing  at  all  in  common  with  the  Pentad  hymns 
i  65-70  to  which  it  is  attached,  except  the  ascription  of  the  hymns  to 
the  god  Agni. 

(iv)  In  the  cretic  and  popular  periods  respectively  there  are 
practically  no  divergences  of  rhythm.  The  process  of  contamination 
appears  to  be  most  advanced  in  the  group  i  161-164,  x  94-191,  and  we 
may  conjecture  that  the  very  latest  trimeter  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  are 
contained  within  those  groups.  Otherwise  the  entire  absence  of 
individuality  in  these  two  periods  is  remarkable.  It  seems  probable 
that  the  hymns  of  both  periods  follow  the  breaking-up  of  the  system  of 
family  collections :  though  they  include  two  groups,  i  31—35  and  i  94— 
115,  which  have  the  outward  characteristics  of  family  collections  and 
appear  as  such  in  the  Samhita  text. 


222 


Trimeter  variations 


235.     Trimeter  variations  in  the  smaller  groups. 


No.  of 

verses 

Arch. 

Stroph. 

Stroph. 

and 
Normal 

Cretic 

Pop. 

ARCHAIC   PERIOD 

Group  I 

.895 

26  2 

7 

12 

12 

3 

1 

2 
3 
4 
5 

6 

Usnih l 
Atyasti ] 

Kakubh-SatobrhatI 1 
Uneven  lyric1 
Brhatl-Satobrhati ■ 
Miscellaneous 

154 
316 
207 
117 
274 
195 

39 
21 
38 
37 
23 
16 

12 
5 

8 

10 

8 

9 

12 
14 
11 
7 
16 
14 

17 
11 
15 
8 
11 
12 

2 
3 
2 
1 
2 
3 

Group  II 

1301 

24 

8 

12 

9 

1 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

i  121,  122 

ii  4,  19,  20,  etc. 

V 

viii  35-37 

x  61,  73,  74,  etc. 

120 

116 

438 

68 

306 

26 
40 
14 
5 
23 

1 

3 

3 

21 

13 

11 
5 
13 
18 
11 

12 
9 

10 
9 

10 

0 
1 
1 
0 

1 

Group  HI 

2983 

18 

7 

13 

11 

1 

12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 

i  58-64,  ix  93,  94 
i  76-92,  ix  88 
i  165-190 

,,           (decas.  Tristubh) 
vi 

,,           (decas.  Tristubh) 
x  48-50 

strophic  period 

211 
310 
459 
181 
1206 
316 
116 

19 
15 
11 
21 

18 
30 

27 

5 

7 
6 
7 
7 
6 
7 

24 

12 

20 

12 

9 

8 

7 

9 

14 
9 
6 
12 
11 
13 

0 
0 

1 
1 

0 
0 
2 

Group  IV 

2301 

12 

16 

13 

10 

1 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 

i  55-57 
i  141-158 

vii  (Tristubh  hymns) 
,,    (Br. -Sat.  hymns) 
ix  70,'  71,  76,  79  (Jagati) 
107,  110 

90 

306 

1615 

100 

110 

71 

12 
12 
12 
16 
12 
11 

21 

9 
18 

6 
13 

6 

13 
21 
17 
9 
21 
10 

3 
9 

11 
10 

7 
12 

0 
0 
0 
3 

1 
1 

Group  V 

371 

18 

3 

14 

16 

1 

25 
26 
27 

i  36-48  (Br. -Sat.) 
viii  1-11,  33 
viii  49-57 

117 
141 
100 

22 

17 
11 

4 

1 
3 

15 
12 
15 

19 
13 
13 

2 

1 
0 

1  These  groups  include  some  hymns  in  the  larger  Groups  II  and  III  also. 

2  These  figures  are  proportionate  to  each  100  verses. 


Trimeter  variations 


223 


Trimeter  variations  in  the  smaller  groups  (contd.). 


No.  of 
verses 

Arch. 

Stroph. 

Stroph. 

and 
Normal 

Cretic 

Pop. 

NORMAL   PERIOD 

Group  VI 

4633 

8 

4 

17 

14 

1 

28 

ii,  x  91,  92 

1087 

7 

4 

13 

15 

1 

29 

iv 

1593 

12 

3 

18 

12 

0 

30 

V 

942 

4 

4 

18 

16 

0 

31 

ix  68-86  (JagatI) 

568 

5 

4 

20 

9 

0 

32 

ix  87-97  (Tristubh) 

348 

4 

4 

18 

14 

0 

Group  VII 

1961 

5 

8 

16 

19 

3 

33 

i  71-73 

120 

5 

3 

11 

13 

0 

34 

i  116-119 

184 

9 

24 

14 

33 

0 

35 

iii 

1418 

5 

8 

17 

18 

4 

36 

x  89,   104,  160 
CRETIC   PERIOD 

129 

6 

2 

16 

19 

0 

Group  VIII 

2628 

5 

2 

14 

23 

1 

37 

i  51-54 

208 

3 

1 

13 

18 

0 

38 

i  94-115 

685 

6 

2 

14 

24 

2 

39 

i  123-126 

152 

2 

1 

11 

24 

0 

40 

i  140-160 

188 

6 

1 

16 

23 

2 

41 

iii 

136 

7 

2 

16 

21 

0 

42 

vi 

324 

4 

2 

15 

17 

2 

43 

vii 

546 

5 

3 

11 

20 

1 

44 

ix  80,  90,  97  (parts) 

156 

3 

1 

15 

32 

0 

45 

x  65,  66,  122 

148 

6 

2 

14 

18 

5 

Group  IX 

2617 

5 

3 

14 

19 

2 

46 

i  31-35 

284 

4 

1 

13 

19 

1 

47 

ii 

253 

3 

2 

14 

22 

1 

48 

vi 

109 

4 

0 

10 

10 

2 

49 

x  29-80 

1168 

5 

4 

15 

19 

2 

50 

x  96-178 
POPULAR  RIGVEDA 

428 

6 

4 

13 

17 

2 

Group  X 

3463 

5 

2 

12 

18 

5 

51 

i  161-164 

397 

7 

2 

8 

24 

8 

52 

iv 

109 

4 

4 

17 

21 

1 

53 

vii 

279 

5 

1 

10 

14 

3 

54 

viii 

156 

6 

5 

12 

15 

3 

55 

x  10-18 

386 

7 

2 

12 

18 

5 

56 

x  27-90 

747 

4 

1 

13 

17 

5 

57 

x  94-191 

939 

6 

2 

15 

19 

7 

224  History  of  trimeter  verse 

236.  The  detailed  examination  of  trimeter  verse  in  this 
chapter  leads  us  to  a  somewhat  different  view  of  its  history 
to  that  assumed  as  a  starting-point  in  §  94  above.  At  that 
time  decasyllabic  and  iambic  variations  appeared  to  be  charac- 
teristic of  the  earlier  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  as  opposed  to  the 
cretic  variation  and  contamination,  which  characterize  its  later 
parts.  Now,  however,  we  are  in  a  position  to  distinguish  two 
kinds  of  variation  in  the  earlier  parts.  Variations  of  almost  every 
kind  appear  side  by  side  in  those  groups  which  we  can  assign 
most  confidently  to  the  archaic  period,  resulting  in  a  rhythm 
which  we  may  call  the  less  rigid  trimeter  rhythm,  and  which 
exactly  corresponds  to  the  earliest  form  of  dimeter  rhythm  (§  201). 
This  we  seem  bound  to  recognize  as  the  earliest  form  of  trimeter 
verse  in  the  Rigveda.  But  the  different  variations  which  together 
contribute  to  this  general  rhythm  do  not  disappear  simultaneously. 
Just  when  the  rests  and  most  other  variations  are  becoming 
rare,  we  find  a  developement  of  the  iambic  rhythm,  especially 
in  connexion  with  the  secondary  caesura:  this  rhythm  affecting 
chiefly  the  break,  but  to  some  extent  the  opening  also.  Thus 
the  iambic  and  cretic  variations  no  longer  appear  as  contrasted, 
but  as  characterizing  successive  stages  in  the  developement  of  the 
metre.  To  a  certain  extent  these  variations  even  overlap,  as  in 
the  hymns  i  116-119  and  in  the  third  Mandala.  The  iambic 
variations  cease  therefore  to  be  regarded  as  in  themselves  evidence 
of  the  earliest  date :  and  indeed  it  has  been  noticed  above  (§§  94  v, 
207  iii)  that  they  are  not  uncommon  in  some  comparatively 
late  hymns. 

These  facts  supply  us  with  an  explanation  of  the  develope- 
ment of  the  cretic  break :  it  is  the  shifting  of  the  rhythm  which 
follows  a  late  caesura  in  the  Vasisthl  verse  to  a  similar  position 
following  an  early  caesura. 

The  considerations  discussed  in  this  chapter  have  led  us  to 
assign  to  the  same  period  two  of  the  largest  family  collections, 
those  of  Vamadeva  and  Vasistha :  whilst  several  others  are  assigned 
to  neighbouring  periods.  Earlier  enquiries  into  the  history  of  the 
Rigveda  have  generally  taken  the  form  of  an  attempt  to  arrange 
the  separate  family  collections  in  order  of  time :  but  this  point 
of  view  now  appears  to  be  of  subordinate  importance.  It  would 
seem  more  correct  to  think  of  all  the  family  collections  on  the 
larger  scale  as  practically  contemporaneous,  and  to  speak  of  a 


History  of  trimeter  verse  225 

'period  of  the  family  collections'  as  contrasted  with  an  earlier 
period  of  small  collections,  and  later  periods  in  which  the  distinc- 
tion of  families  had  disappeared. 

Of  all  parts  of  the  verse,  the  opening  lends  itself  least  to 
historical  treatment.  We  can,  however,  find  no  explanation  of 
the  comparative  frequency  of  short  final  vowels  in  the  second 
place  except  by  assuming  it  to  be  a  survival  of  a  metrical 
freedom  originally  used  in  syllables  of  all  kinds.  In  this  case 
the  rule  prohibiting  the  use  of  consecutive  short  syllables  in  the 
second  and  third  places  can  hardly  have  existed  in  the  pre-Vedic 
period :  though  the  occurrence  of  such  a  combination  would  not 
have  been  very  common,  owing  to  the  general  preference  for  long 
syllables  in  the  opening  (§  35). 

237.  From  the  history  of  trimeter  rhythm  in  the  Rigveda  we 
pass  naturally  to  the  consideration  of  its  probable  rhythm  in  the 
pre-Vedic  period.  As  to  this  we  can  only  form  conjectures  by 
observing  the  trend  of  change  from  the  earliest  Vedic  period 
onwards. 

In  that  earliest  period  iambic  variations  are  no  more  common 
than  many  other  irregularities :  they  are  however,  under  certain 
conditions,  on  the  increase.  There  is  therefore  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  pre-Vedic  verse  used  iambic  rhythm  at  the  break : 
and  the  rule  laid  down  in  §  45,  that  the  caesura  must  be  followed 
by  two  short  syllables,  seems  most  probable  for  the  pre-Vedic 
period  also. 

The  caesura  appears  indifferently  after  the  fourth  or  fifth 
syllable  in  every  part  of  the  Rigveda :  yet  there  is  some  slight 
reason  for  thinking  the  early  caesura  to  be  the  normal  position  ; 
for  the  need  for  variety  in  the  opening  is  more  felt  when  the 
caesura  is  in  that  position. 

With  regard  to  the  cadence  we  notice  that,  whilst  in  the 
earliest  period  Tristubh  hymns  only  rarely  exhibit  Jagati  cadence, 
and  Jagati  hymns  can  hardly  be  found,  the  lyric  hymns  admit 
Tristubh  cadence  in  their  trimeter  verses  with  some  freedom. 
It  would  seem  to  be  a  probable  interpretation  of  these  facts 
that  Tristubh  was  originally  the  dominant  metre,  and  that  the 
uneven  lyric  hymns  shew  Jagati  verse  in  process  of  developement 
from  it  through  the  influence  of  dimeter  verse. 

Although  the  secondary  caesura  is  not  specially  characteristic 
a.  15 


226  The  primitive  trimeter  verse 

of  the  earliest  period,  yet  its  possibility  seems  to  point  to  the 
recognition  by  the  earliest  poets  of  a  division  of  the  verse  at  that 
point,  corresponding  more  or  less  to  the  analysis  of  the  modern 
metres  into  'feet.' 

From  these  considerations  we  seem  to  arrive  at  the  following 
scheme  as  representing  the  dominant  form  of  pre-Vedic  trimeter 
verse,  and  as  the  possible  starting-point  of  the  developement  of  the 
Vedic  forms  generally : 


all   the  symbols  being  understood   to  mark  preferences  far  less 
marked  than  those  of  the  Rigveda  generally. 

(i)  This  conclusion  corresponds  as  far  as  regards  the  opening  with 
that  reached  in  $  201  for  dimeter  verse.  In  the  history  of  the  Rigveda 
the  two  forms  gradually  diverge,  dimeter  verse  preferring  the  long  third 
syllable,  the  trimeter  verse  inclining  towards  the  short  third  syllable. 

(ii)  The  presumed  pre-Vedic  forms  of  dimeter  and  trimeter  verse 
approximate  to  some  extent  to  the  non-quantitative  verse  of  the  Avesta, 
inasmuch  as  almost  every  possible  rhythm  is  occasionally  found.  But 
in  this  direction  much  is  still  left  unexplained. 

(iii)  Analogies  drawn  from  Greek  metre  might  suggest  to  us  that 
the  two  parts  of  trimeter  verse  were  derived  from  two  separate  verses  : 
but  we  must  reject  this  view,  as  there  is  no  trace  of  syllaba  anceps 
either  before  or  after  the  caesura. 


238.     The  chief  problems  that  remain  are  three:  (i)  what  is 

the  origin  of  the  rhythm  ^  ^ {ionicus  a  minor e)  in  the  second 

member  of  trimeter  verse  ?  (ii)  what  is  the  origin  of  decasyllabic 
metre  ?  and  lastly  (iii)  why  is  the  iambic  rhythm,  both  in  dimeter 
and  trimeter  verse,  encroached  upon  in  the  opening  by  long 
syllables,  in  the  cadence  by  short  syllables  ? 

To  these  questions  the  following  conjectural  answers  may  be 
given : 

(i)  In  the  developement  of  trimeter  verse  the  caesura  was 
prior  to  any  differentiation  of  quantity.  The  natural  pause  at 
the  caesura  for  taking  breath  made  it  convenient  that  short 
syllables  should  follow :  from  this  beginning  a  preference  for 
long  or  short  syllables  spread  in  both  directions  on  the  principle 
of  alternation,  in  successive  waves  not  always  producing  identical 
metrical  results.  This  process  never  affected  the  extremities  of 
the  verse. 


Origin  of  the  'rest'  227 

(ii)  Decasyllabic  Tristubh  does  not  arise  from  the  equivalence 
of  one  long  syllable  to  two  short  (of  which  there  is  no  trace  in 
the  Rigveda),  nor  from  contamination  of  two  forms  in  which  the 
caesura  is  in  different  positions:  nor  is  it  an  indirect  result  of 
the  process  of  syllabic  contraction.  Against  any  of  these  suppo- 
sitions stands  the  fact  that  the  Viratsthana  verse,  which  we  can 
most  certainly  trace  to  the  archaic  period,  has  a  rhythm  which 
is  distinct  from  that  which  would  be  reached  by  any  of  these 
processes.  It  seems  therefore  to  follow  that  this  form  of  verse 
is  a  direct  and  independent  result  of  the  natural  pause  at  the 
caesura :  that  is,  that  the  '  rest '  is  the  starting-point  of  the  de- 
velopement,  and  that  this  causes  directly  a  preference  for  a  long 
sixth  syllable,  and  that  the  long  sixth  syllable  (here  as  always) 
causes  a  secondary  preference  for  a  short  seventh  syllable. 

The  '  decasyllabic  metres '  we  take  to  be  a  developement  from 
decasyllabic  Tristubh  verses. 

If  this  explanation  is  correct  the  GautamI  verse  ($226  iii)  has  con- 
siderable interest,  because  in  this  type  of  decasyllabic  verse  the  rest  is 
actually  followed  by  two  long  syllables,  quite  contrary  to  the  ordinary 
rhythm  of  the  break. 

The  '  neutral  rests '  may  well  be  later  in  date  than  the  Viratsthana 
verse,  and  may  represent  an  assimilation  of  the  decasyllabic  verse  to  the 
normal  trimeter  type  :  assimilation  in  the  opposite  direction  being 
represented  by  the  iambic  rhythm  of  the  Vasistha  hymns. 

(iii)  For  an  explanation  of  the  preference  for  short  syllables 
in  the  cadence  (§  35)  it  is  most  natural  to  look  to  dimeter  verse, 
in  which  the  contrast  between  the  opening  and  the  cadence  is 
most  marked.  The  comparative  favour  shewn  to  a  short  sixth 
syllable  is  not,  however,  easy  to  explain :  it  may  be  due  to  the 
influence  of  the  trimeter  rhythm  at  the  break.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  a  strong  desire  to  differentiate  the  opening  and  the 
cadence  in  dimeter  verse  contributed  to  maintain  this  distinction, 
whatever  its  origin  may  have  been. 

Whatever  explanations  may  be  adopted  as  to  particular  facts, 
it  is  clear  that  both  dimeter  and  trimeter  verse  had  a  long  history 
of  developement  before  the  Vedic  period.  For  the  history  of 
trimeter  verse  after  the  Vedic  time,  it  must  suffice  here  to  refer 
to  Dr  R.  Kiihnau's  'Die  Tristubh-Jagatl  Familie'  (Gottingen, 
1886). 


15—2 


CHAPTEE   IX. 

THE   LESS  USUAL  METRES— STANZAS  AND  STROPHES. 

239.  With  the  conclusion  of  the  analysis  of  dimeter  and 
trimeter  verse  the  discussion  of  Vedic  metre  is  in  the  main 
complete :  the  combination  of  verses  into  stanzas  and  strophes 
being  usually  so  simple  that  it  has  been  sufficiently  explained  in 
the  General  Introduction.  There  remain  however  for  consideration 
a  number  of  hymns,  chiefly  belonging  to  the  earlier  periods  of 
Vedic  poetry,  which  are  constructed  upon  principles  which  differ 
from  those  already  discussed  in  detail.  In  these  hymns  the 
rhythm  or  internal  structure  is  on  the  whole  of  comparatively 
small  importance,  whilst  the  number  of  syllables  in. the  verse,  and 
the  combination  of  verses  into  stanzas  and  of  stanzas  into  strophes, 
that  is  to  say,  the  elements  of  the  '  external  structure '  (§  30) 
require  to  be  carefully  considered.  This  inquiry  is  of  a  much 
easier  kind  than  those  in  which  we  have  so  far  been  engaged.  It 
will  be  found  that  most  of  the  hymns  to  be  examined  belong  to 
groups  that  are  fairly  well  defined,  and  which  include  one  or  two 
standard  types  and  a  number  of  variations  which  only  slightly 
depart  from  them.  Such  groups  are  (i)  the  'uneven  lyric '  hymns, 
(ii)  the  lyric  and  dimeter  triplets,  amongst  which  Usnih  and 
Gayatii  are  most  prominent,  (iii)  the  Kakubh-SatobrhatI  and 
Brhati-Satobrhati  strophes,  (iv)  the  Atyasti  hymns  and  (v)  the 
decasyllabic  metres.  After  the  consideration  of  the  separate 
groups  it  will  be  possible  to  discuss  the  few  hymns  which  do  not 
fall  into  the  classification,  and  to  consider  the  relationship  of  the 
groups  to  one  another  and  to  the  bulk  of  the  hymns  in  the 
Rigveda ;  and  also  such  traces  of  strophic  arrangement  as  can  be 
found  in  ordinary  trimeter  verse. 


The  'uneven  lyric''  hi/mm  229 

240.  The  '  uneven  lyric '  metres  have  been  defined  in  §  27  as 
those  which  combine  in  one  stanza  verses  of  eight  and  eleven 
syllables.  A  list  of  such  hymns  has  been  given  in  §  186,  and  we 
have  seen  reason  to  believe  that  the  dimeter  and  trimeter  verses 
which  they  contain  represent  the  earliest  Vedic  types  of  these  two 
kinds  of  verse  (§§  196,  233).  The  irregularity  shewn  in  these 
hymns  as  they  stand  in  the  Samhita  text  is  a  further  indication  of 
their  antiquity,  since  in  the  Rigveda  proper  we  find  that  strictness 
of  metrical  regulation  increases  in  the  later  periods. 

The  antiquity  of  these  hymns  may  cause  irregularities  in  the 
text  in  various  ways.  Some  are  due  to  the  lack  of  strict  metrical 
principle  which  characterized  the  composers:  others  to  the  per- 
plexities of  the  reciters  and  copyists  in  preserving  the  tradition 
of  poems  of  which  both  the  dialect  and  the  metre  were  becoming 
strange  to  them.  Hence  in  these  hymns  questions  of  emendation 
assume  an  importance  unusual  in  the  Rigveda,  and  it  becomes 
impossible  to  feel  confident  as  to  the  original  form  of  many  of  the 
stanzas.  Where  however  difficulties  of  metre  and  of  interpretation 
occur  in  the  same  stanza,  it  will  be  justifiable  to  look  to  the 
composition  of  the  hymn  as  a  whole  as  a  guide  :  and  though  it 
may  not  be  practicable  to  restore  with  any  certainty  the  original 
form,  yet  it  will  appear  that  there  is  little  justification  for  the 
complete  despair  with  which  the  metre  of  some  of  these  hymns 
has  been  regarded  by  Western  critics. 

241.  The  following  principles  are  suggested  as  a  clue  to  the 
difficulties  of  the  '  uneven  lyric '  hymns : 

(i)  The  number  of  verses  in  the  stanza  is  not  fixed  :  the  con- 
cluding stanza  in  particular  is  often  made  of  greater  length,  as  in 
the  Atri  Anustubh,  by  repeating  one  or  more  of  the  verses  in  the 
scheme. 

(ii)  The  succession  of  dimeter  and  trimeter  verses  is  seldom 
quite  regular :  in  particular,  dimeter  verses  are  occasionally  re- 
placed by  trimeter. 

(iii)  By  contamination  of  the  cadences  of  the  two  kinds  of 
verse  the  dimeter  verse  is  often,  sometimes  almost  regularly, 
reduced  to  seven  syllables:  whilst  the  trimeter  verse  is  with 
varying  regularity  extended  to  twelve  syllables,  and  thus  approxi- 
mates to  that  used  in  lyric  verse. 


230  Uneven  lyric  hymns 

(iv)  Amongst  the  trimeter  verses  decasyllabic  variations  are 
common. 

The  discussion  will  be  the  more  readily  followed  if  we  begin 
with  the  hymns  in  which  the  metre  causes  the  least  difficulty, 
and  reserve  to  the  last  those  in  which  either  the  metre  is  very 
complicated  or  the  text  less  satisfactory  than  usual. 

242.  The  easier  hymns  to  interpret  are  of  course  those  which 
come  nearest  to  the  regular  lyric  metres.  These  hymns  are  v  24, 
x  93  and  x  132,  to  which  should  perhaps  be  added  i  127,  129  and 
150,  and  viii  35.  Looked  at  from  the  later  standpoint,  these  are 
lyric  hymns  marked  by  somewhat  frequent  catalexis  both  of  the 
dimeter  and  the  trimeter  verses :  but  regarded  historically  some 
or  all  of  them  mark  a  transition  stage  between  the  '  uneven  lyric ' 
and  the  lyric  metres.  Such  further  difficulties  as  appear  in  the 
separate  hymns  are  easily  explained  by  the  principles  stated  in 
the  last  section. 

(i)  The  hymn  i  127  can  hardly  be  separated  from  the  whole  group 
i  127-139,  which  we  have  seen  reason  to  regard  as  not  quite  of  the 
earliest  date  (*$  201,  231).  But  catalectic  verses  are  somewhat  common, 
occurring  as  la  2a  lOd  He,  and  there  are  also  several  irregularities  of 
rhythm.  Of  the  other  hymns  in  this  group  only  i  129  has  the  same 
characteristics,  but  they  occur  less  frequently,  the  catalectic  verses 
being  5f  8a  8e. 

(ii)  i  150  is  treated  by  the  Anukranianl  as  an  Usnili  hymn,  but 
of  its  three  trimeter  verses  only  one  (2c)  has  more  than  11  syllables: 
the  probable  standard  is  therefore  8.8.  11. 

(iii)  v  24  is  conveniently  included  here,  though  the  type  is  rather 
8.8.3  than  8.11.  Only  in  lc  (varuthiah)  do  we  find  four  syllables 
in  the  short  verse. 

(iv)  The  hymn  viii  35,  like  i  127,  belongs  to  a  group  from  which 
it  cannot  easily  be  detached,  but  its  peculiar  structure  deserves  notice. 
The  regular  type  of  the  stanza  is  12.  12.  12.8,  and  the  stanzas  are 
grouped  in  triplets,  the  last  three  verses  of  the  stanza  being  the  same 
throughout  each  triplet.  Of  the  21  initial  verses  4  have  catalectic 
cadence,  namely  6a  13a  14a  15a:  and  of ■  the  21  refrain  verses  2, 
namely  10b  =  llb=12b  and  16b=17b=18b. 

(v)  The  hymn  x  93  approximates  to  the  type  12.12.8.8,  and  is 
accordingly  described  by  Indian  tradition,  after  a  careful  counting  of 
the  whole  number  of  syllables,  as  of  the  Prastarapahkti  metre.  Of  the 
trimeter  verses,  however,  la  lb  4a  4b  14a  14b  are  certainly  catalectic 
(14b  being  also  'hybrid'),  and  12a  12b  may  be  read  as  catalectic:  of 
the  dimeter  verses  2d  is  certainly  catalectic,  and  5c  9b  9d  13d  14d 
may  be  so  read.  The  hymn  therefore  appears  to  be  associated  with 
the  '  uneven  lyric  metres '  in  the  irregularity  of  the  cadence. 


Metres  of  x  22  and  93  281 

With  this  limitation  ten  of  the  fifteen  stanzas  correspond  to  the 
type  described.  Stanza  9  is  of  the  type  12.8.8.8.8,  and  stanza  15 
of  the  type  12.8.8.8:  these  stanzas  shew  the  irregularity  of  external 
structure  which  characterizes  the  uneven  lyric  metres.  The  remaining 
stanzas  2,  3  and  13  are  described  in  the  Anukramani  as  Anustubh  : 
this  may  be  correct,  but  in  any  case  some  emendation  is  required  in 
each,  and  it  is  quite  likely  that  each  of  the  original  stanzas  contained 
at  least  one  trimeter  verse.  In  this  case  they  may  have  run  somewhat 
as  follows  : 

yajile-yajfle  u  saparyati  sd  dev&amp;n 
yah  sumndm  dlrghasruttamd 
dvivasati  agneh.  2 

visvesaam  \\  irajyati  vasundm 
devdnaam  mahdh  sd 
visve  hi  visvdmahasah 
visve  yajnesu  yajniyah.  3 

yesai'n  rdbhir  ^  hiranydyl  vavdrta 
yuktd  isd  hiranydyl 
uemddhitd  vam  fawthsici 
vfthd  viprdh  stavanta.  13 

(vi)  The  hymn  x  1 32  approximates  to  the  same  standard  12.12.8.8: 
stanza  6  is  exactly  of  this  type,  and  stanza  2  can  be  read  in  the  same 
way.  The  final  stanza  7  has  an  extra  dimeter  verse,  and  7c  is 
catalectic.  In  stanza  4  (11.11.7.11)  all  four  verses  are  catalectic, 
and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  stanzas  3  and  5  are  substantially  of 
the  same  type  :  in  this  case  3c  requires  correction,  perhaps  to  ydd  va 
pusyati  dadvan.  In  stanza  1  only  the  first  verse  causes  any  difficulty  : 
metre  and  meaning  would  be  adequately  represented  by  some  such 
verse  as  Ijdndm  id  y  vdsund  dyauh  prnaktu. 


243.  In  x  22  we  have  an  isolated  but  almost  perfect  example 
of  an  '  uneven  lyric '  hymn,  the  type  being  11.8.8.8.  The 
position  of  this  hymn  in  the  Vimada  collection  enables  us 
definitely  to  assign  it  to  the  same  period  as  the  earliest  forms 
of  Anustubh  verse  (§  201). 

The  metre  is  termed  Purastddbrhatl  in  the  Anukramani,  as  though 
the  type  were  12.8.8.8:  and  stanzas  5,  7,  and  9  are  described  as 
Anustubh.  Of  the  opening  verses  of  these  three  stanzas  5a  is  Tristubh, 
if  we  read  vdatasya  (§  142  v):  9a  is  Tristubh  with  a  double  rest  (§  226): 
7a  alone  is  dimeter,  and  probably  needs  correction. 

Of  the  initial  verses  only  3a  and  11a  have  Jagati  cadence,  but 
many  have  rests  or  other  archaic  variations  :  of  the  dimeter  verses  3c 
5b  and  6c  are  probably  to  be  read  as  catalectic. 

The  whole  number  of  stanzas  is  the  same  as  in  x  93,  but  the  last 
stanza  is  Tristubh. 


232  Metres  of  i  88  and  120 

244.  The  more  difficult  hymns  of  this  class  are  i  88,  i  120  1-9, 
and  x  105.  But  although  it  may  not  be  possible  to  determine  the 
original  form  of  each  stanza  in  these  hymns,  we  can  feel  confident 
that  the  general  type  in  the  mind  of  the  composer  was  for  i  88 
11  .  11  .  7  .  11  ;  for  i  120  11.11.7;  and  for  x  105  11  .  7  .  11.  In 
these  hymns  therefore  the  Tristubh  or  trochaic  cadence  is  generally 
found  in  both  the  trimeter  and  the  dimeter  verses. 

(i)  In  i  88  stanza  5  may  be  taken  as  giving  the  normal  type, 
namely  : 

etdt  tidn  nd  n  yojanam  aceti 
sasvdr  ha  ydn  |(  maruto  gotamo  vah 

pdsyan  hiranyacakran 
dyodamstrdn  y  vidhdvato  vardhun. 

If  this  is  so,  stanza  1  diverges  by  having  a  full  dimeter  verse,  and 
stanzas  3  and  4  diverge  by  having  trimeter  verses  in  the  third  place, 
whilst  stanza  6  has  a  dimeter  verse  in  the  fourth  place.  2c  which 
contains  nine  syllables  must  in  any  case  be  emended.  In  addition  we 
have  two  irregular  forms  of  Tristubh  verse,  lb  being  hypersyllabic 
(§  224),  and  Id  having  a  double  rest  (§  226). 

(ii)  In  i  120  1-9  both  metre  and  meaning  are  very  obscure  in 
many  of  the  stanzas.  The  starting-point  for  the  interpretation  of  both 
is  to  be  found  in  stanza  8,  which  gives  us  a  metrical  type  11.11.7, 
and  also  indicates  that  the  matter  of  the  hymn  is  exactly  what  is 
usual  in  hymns  to  the  Asvins.  It  follows  that  the  text  has  been 
violently  disturbed  in  some  of  the  other  stanzas,  and  needs  correction. 
On  the  analogy  of  i  88  we  may  infer  that  the  third  verse  will  not 
always  be  of  seven  syllables,  but  may  appear  as  a  dimeter  or  a  Tristubh 
verse.     In  stanza  4  we  find  an  additional  verse  of  7  syllables. 

It  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  book  to  discuss  possible 
emendations  of  the  text  as  such,  but  the  metrical  effect  of  the  original 
hymn  may  have  been  somewhat  as  follows  : 

kd  frddhdti  n  hotard  asvind  vdm 
kb  vdm  josam  ^  ubhdyor  a  vidhdti 

kathd  jddsdd  dpracetdh.  1 

vidvdmsd  it  \\  \kHbha  jprcchdti  jsdntd 
dvidvdn  itthd  u  dpara  acetdh 

nu  cin  nu  mdrta  fasyat.  2 

f  dvidvdmsah  h  havdmahe  \vaydm  vdm 

td  no  vidvdmsd  \\  mdnma  \d  jjusethdm 

prd  j  riricydd  \i  ddyamdno  yuvdkuh.  3 

vi  prcchdmi  n  pdkid  jcid  \vratdni 
vdsatkrtasya  ^  fadhvardsya  dasrd 

td  pdtam  sdhyaso  nah 

pdtdm  ca  rdbhyaso  nah.  4 


Metre  of  x  1  05  233 

prd  yd  jghosi  n  \bhfgavdnena  j.subhro. 
ydyd  vdcd  h  ydjati  pajriyo  va/nt 

prd  fdevayur  nd  fsddhat.  5 

\nii  jcic  chrutam  \\  tdkavdnasya  f  gdthdm 
ahd/rh  cid  dhi  ^  rirebhd  asvind  vani 

dksi  s'ubhas  pail  ddn.  6 

yuvdm  fydd  \gd  \\  dstam  d  Jtamsayethe 
td  no  vasu  (|  sugopdd  sidtam 

pdtdm  vfkdd  aghdyoh.  7 

md  kdsmai  dhdtam  ^  •  amitrine  nah 
md  fkutra  no  n  grhebhyo  dhendvo  guh 

standbhuja  dsisvlh.  8 

duhlydn  mitrd  \\  -dhitaye  yuvaku 
rdye  ca  no  \\  mimitdm  vdjavatyai 

ise  ca  dhenumdtyai.  9 

For  previous  discussions  of  this  hymn  refer  to  Prof.  A.  Ludwig's 
Rigveda  iv  39-42,  and  Prof.  R.  Pischel  in  Vedische  Studien  ii  87-109. 

The  ingenious  theory1  that  the  peculiarities  of  this  hymn  are  due  to 
the  ill  temper  of  the  bard,  who  purposely  made  it  unmetrical,  is  not 
very  probable.  To  a  bard  familiar  with  the  smoother  metres  of  (say) 
the  normal  period  the  construction  of  a  hymn  of  this  type  would  have 
been  a  very  severe  task. 

(iii)  In  x  105  the  normal  type  of  the  stanza  is  11.7.11;  this  is 
found  in  the  text  in  stanzas  1,  2  and  10,  and  is  still  more  clearly 
proved  by  the  form  of  the  final  stanza,  in  which  each  of  the  two  last 
verses  is  doubled,  giving  the  type  11.7.7.11.11.  In  7a  we  have 
a  trimeter  verse  of  12  syllables,  unless  we  substitute  ddsyu  as  an 
abbreviated  form  for  ddsyave :  8a  has  a  double  rest,  8b  is  a  full 
dimeter  verse,  and  9a  appears  to  be  a  dimeter  verse,  although  it  is 
easy  to  restore  a  trimeter  verse  in  the  shape  urdhud  •  „  tretini  ydd 
bhiiut  te.  The  most  difficult  stanzas  are  those  from  3  to  6,  which  may 
perhaps  be  restored  somewhat  as  follows : 

dpa  \ayoli  \\  •  indro  jmdrtio  nd 

sasramdno  bibhlvdn 
subhe  ydd  •  h  yuyuje  tdvislvdn.  3 

sdcd  ay  oh  M  •  carkrse  fydd  fenam 

\u\ianaksat  saparydn 
naddyor  vi-  M  vratayoh  sura  indrah.  4 

kesavantd  n  yah  fsubhd  adhi  tasthaii 

vydcasvantd  nd  pustyai 
biprdbhidm  n  vanoti  siprinivdn.  5 

rsvebhir  fyad  n  rsvd-ojds  tatdk.sa 

prd  surah  sdvasdstaut 
rbhur  nd  •  u  krdtubhir  mdtarisvd.  6 

1  R.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  i  1  ff. 


234  Lyric  triplets 

(iv)  Isolated  stanzas  of  the  uneven  lyric  type  appear  to  occur  as 
follows :  in  viii  46  20  of  the  type  11.8.11.8:  in  viii  46  14  of  the  type 
13.8.14;  see  Appendix  III,  No.  18  :  in  iii  21  4  as  11 .  11  .  11 .  8  :  in 
v  19  5  (unless  the  text  is  corrected)  of  the  type  8.11.11.11.  For 
similar  stanzas  in  the  popular  Rigveda  see  Appendix  III  (§  253),  Nos. 
35  and  39. 

245.  Almost  the  whole  of  the  lyric  verse  in  the  Rigveda,  and 
a  large  proportion  of  the  dimeter  hymns,  shew  a  system  of  group- 
ing of  stanzas.  The  most  common  grouping  is  that  of  three 
stanzas  to  make  a  metrical  unit,  the  hymn  consisting  of  any 
number  of  such  units.  Owing  to  the  disconnected  character  of 
the  Vedic  poems,  it  might  not  always  be  easy  to  trace  this  group- 
ing by  the  meaning:  but  it  is  easily  recognized  by  the  great 
number  of  hymns  in  which  the  number  of  stanzas  is  some  multiple 
of  3,  and  by  the  fact  that  changes  of  metre  so  commonly  take 
place  after  each  third  stanza. 

A  group  of  three  stanzas  may  be  called  a  triplet.  The  principal 
kinds  of  triplets  in  the  Rigveda  are  the  following :  (i)  Usnih  or 
other  homogeneous  lyric  triplets ;  (ii)  triplets  of  mixed  lyric 
metres,  or  of  lyric  metres  combined  with  Gayatri,  Tristubh,  or 
Anustubh ;  (iii)  Gayatri  or  Anustubh  triplets ;  (iv)  triplets  in 
which  Anustubh  and  Gayatri  are  combined  in  some  systematic 
way.  In  trimeter  verse  triplets  are  not  common,  and  we  defer  the 
discussion  of  this  point  (see  §  251  i). 

It  is  probable  that  the  system  of  grouping  is  at  times  carried 
further,  and  in  particular  that  groups  of  three  or  five  triplets  are 
deliberately  combined  to  form  a  larger  whole :  in  the  former  case 
an  extra  stanza  is  often  added  to  the  last  triplet,  so  that  the  poem 
as  a  whole  consists  of  ten  stanzas  in  the  one  case  and  fifteen  in 
the  second. 

(i)  Hymns  in  Usnih  metre,  whether  of  the  type  8  .  8 .  8  .  4  or  the 
type  8.8.  12,  are  almost  invariably  grouped  in  triplets  :  the  list  of 
hymns  is  given  in  §  186.  The  only  stanzas  not  so  grouped  are  found  in 
vi  43  (4  Usnih  stanzas),  viii  18  22,  ix  102  (8  stanzas),  106  13,  14 
(2  stanzas):  see  also  subsection  ii. 

Triplets  of  the  Atyasti  type  are  found  in  i  130,  132,  134-137,  v  87 
and  ix  111.  See  also  §  247  ii.  A  triplet  of  the  type  12.8.12  is 
found  in  ix  110  1-3.     For  Brhati  triplets  see  §  246  iv. 

(ii)  It  very  often  appears  from  the  general  arrangement  of  a  hymn 
which  contains  a  large  proportion  of  lyric  stanzas  that  the  stanzas  are 
grouped  in  triplets,  although  the  stanzas  which  form  the  triplet  are  not 
homogeneous,  nor  grouped  according  to  any  recognizable  system. 


Lyric  triplets  235 

Mixed  lyric  triplets  are  found  in  viii  9  4-6,  98  7-9,  10-12,  And  also 
frequently  where  a  Kakubh-SatobrhatI  or  Brhatl-Satobrhatl  strophe  ia 
included  :  for  the  latter  class  see  §  246  i. 

Triplets  in  which  lyric  metres  are  combined  with  dimeter  verse  or 
with  Tristubh  are  found  as  follows:  i  91  16-18;  ii  41  16-18;  *iii  28 
1-3;  v  61  9-11  ;  vi  15  16-18  ;  vii  14  ;  viii  5  37-39,  9  13-15,  24  28-30, 
26  20-22,  23-25,  35  22-24,  70  13-15,  89  5-7. 

(iii)  Of  the  Gayatri  and  Anustubh  verse  contained  in  the  Rigveda 
a  very  large  proportion  is  grouped  in  triplets :  the  system  extends  to 
the  epic  Anustubh  verse  of  the  popular  Rigveda. 

A  grouping  of  this  kind  is  usually  to  be  inferred  where  the  number 
of  Gayatri  verses  in  a  hymn  is  a  multiple  of  9,  or  the  number  of 
Anustubh  verses  a  multiple  of  12:  see  the  'Table  of  Hymns' 
appended  to  Ch.  X. 

(iv)  The  grouping  of  Anustubh  and  Gayatri  together  in  triplets  is 
a  very  simple  and  effective  arrangement.  Usually  the  first  stanza  alone 
in  the  triplet  is  Anustubh  :  of  this  we  have  examples  in  v  28  4-6, 
82  1-3;  viii  3  21-23,  9  19-21,  63  1-3,  7-9,  68  1-12,  74  1-12,  92  1-3; 
ix  101  1-^.  Two  Anustubh  stanzas  are  followed  by  a  Gayatri  stanza 
in  viii  63  4-6,  x  62  8-10.  Two  Gayatri  stanzas  are  followed  by  an 
Anustubh  stanza  in  i  43  7-9,  vi  45  31-33,   ix  67  25-27. 

Similar  groups  each  consisting  of  five  stanzas  are  perhaps  to  be 
found  in  viii  31   5-9,   10-14,  69  7-11,   12—16. 

(v)  l\lore  complicated  groupings  are  chiefly  found  in  Gayatri  verse. 
Groups  of  nine  stanzas  are  found  in  i  1,  16,  17,  19,  41,  43,  50  1-9; 
iii  11,  12,  40-42;  viii  11  1-9,  72,  73,  77  1-9,  79,  80  1-9,  81-85, 
102  1-18  ;  ix  6-13  ;  x  118.  Groups  of  ten  stanzas  are  found  in  i  4-9, 
26,  42,  86;  iii  37  1-10;  iv  15  ;  viii  17  1-10,  38  ;  ix  1-4.  Groups  of 
fifteen  stanzas  are  found  in  i  37,  38,  46  ;  iv  31  ;  vi  16  1—45  ;  viii 
6   1-45,   14,  32,  34  1-15,  44. 

246.  The  combination  of  a  Kakubh  or  BrhatI  stanza  with  a 
SatobrhatI  stanza  so  as  to  form  a  strophe  is  a  well-marked  feature 
of  certain  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  and  in  particular  of  the  Sobhaii, 
Vasistha,  and  Kanva  collections.  The  beginnings  of  the  system 
may  be  traced  back  to  the  lyric  triplets,  in  which  some  third 
stanza  is  combined  with  Kakubh  or  BrhatI  and  SatobrhatI :  and 
there  is  an  intermediate  stage  in  which  the  combination  is  in  pairs 
of  stanzas,  but  many  slight  variations  are  permissible.  The 
strophes  are  so  far  treated  as  single  stanzas,  that  they  are  them- 
selves frequently  combined  in  triplets. 

(i)  Kakubh-Satobrhati  and  Brhati-Satobrhati  strophes  are  found 
combined  with  some  third  stanza  (often  12  .8.8  Purausnih)  making  a 
triplet  as  follows :  vi  48  13-15  (Pur.-B.-Sat.)  16-18  (Kak.-Sat.-Pur.)  19-21 
(B.-B.-Sat.)  ;  vii  96  1-3  (B.-Sat.-Prastarapankti) ;  viii  4  19-21  (B.-Sat- 
Pur.);   x  62  5-7  (An.-B.-Sat.).      In  vi  48  variations  from   the  strict 


236  Brhatl-Satobrhatl  strophes 

type   occur  for  which  see   the   Appendix   to  this  chapter  as  follows  : 
15  No.  63,  21   No.   60. 

(ii)  Kakubh-Satobrhati  strophes  are  found  in  triplets  in  viii  19-21, 
22  7-18,  with  the  following  irregularities  ;  in  viii  19  we  find  an  ex- 
tended strophe  (12.8.12.8.12.8)  as  26-27,  and  37  as  it  stands  is 
Pankti,  though  by  rearrangement  of  the  words  Satobrhati  may  be 
restored ;  and  in  viii  22  stanza  7  is  Brhati,  stanza  8  is  Anustubh,  and 
stanza  12  of  the  type  12.8.12.12.  Another  such  triplet  is  probably 
to  be  found  in  viii  103  8-13,  although  stanza  10  is  in  the  text  only 
Gayatri ;  and  in  ix  108  stanzas  1-6  and  7-12  are  probably  triplets. 

Strophes  not  arranged  in  triplets  are  only  found  in  v  53  5-6,  15-16 
and  ix  108  13-16.     Isolated  Kakubh  verses  do  not  occur. 

(iii)  Brhati-Satobrhati  strophes  are  found  in  triplets  as  follows  : 
iii  16;  vi  48  1-12;  vii"l6,  32,  59  1-6,  66  10-15,  74,  81;  viii  4  1-18,  10, 
22  1-6,  61,  70  1-6,  71  10-15,  87,  88,  90,  101  1-12,  ix  107. 

The  hymns  named  contain  the  following  irregularities.  In  vi  48 
stanzas  6  and  8  are  of  the  type  12.8.12.8.8,  7  is  of  the  type 
8.8.12.8.8,  and  11  is  Kakubh.  In  vii  32  we  have  an  extended 
Satobrhati  stanza  as  2-3,  of  the  type  12.8.12.8.12.8.  In  viii 
10  1-6  stanzas  2  and  4  are  variations  on  Satobrhati,  of  the  respective 
types  12.8.12.12  and  8.8.12.12.  In  viii  101  stanza  3  is  Gayatri, 
and  there  is  an  appended  Brhati  stanza  after  stanza  12.  In  ix  107  we 
have  extended  Satobrhati  stanzas  of  the  same  type  as  above  as  2-3  and 
15-16 ;  for  stanza  9  see  §§  142  ii,  151  i,  228  i. 

In  v  56  we  have  a  hymn  of  nine  stanzas,  of  which  two  only  are 
Satobrhati  and  the  rest  Brhati. 

Similar  strophes  not  arranged  in  triplets  are  regular  in  the  Kanva 
hymns,  and  i  36,  39,  40,  44,  47,  48  ;  viii  3  1-20,  and  49-54  are  so 
composed.  Elsewhere  we  find  the  hymns  vi  46,  viii  27,  60,  66  1-14,  99 
composed  of  these  strophes. 

The  Kanva  hymns  contain  no  irregularities. 

Detached  strophes  occur  i  84  19-20;  viii  1  1-4,  17  14-15,  46  n-121, 
25-26,  27—28,  77  10-ir,  89  1-4,  103  4-7  ;  x  33  2-3.  Here  viii  46  12  is  of 
the  type  8.12.8.12,  and  viii  103  5  of  the  type  11.12.12.8. 

1  See  §  248  iii. 

(iv)  Brhati  stanzas  occur  in  triplets  in  vi  59  1-6;  viii  33  1-15,  62 
7-91,  70  7-12,  97  1-9  ;  x  150  1-3.  Other  Brhati  hymns  are  iii  44,  45  ; 
viii  1  5-32.  Detached  stanzas  are  found  as  i  139  5,  *170  1  ;  iii 
53  18;  v  53  2  ;  vi  15  18,  42  4,  47  19,  60  14  ;  viii  30  3,  46  71,  u,  19, 
69  r7,  18,  78  10;  ix  98  n,  99  1 ;  *x  14  15,  *101  5,  *102  1,  3,  12.  For 
the  position  of  this  metre  in  the  later  parts  of  the  Rigveda  see  §  94  i. 

1  These  are  '  Dimeter  Brhati '  stanzas,  the  type  being  8.8.8.4.8. 

(v)  Satobrhati  and  the  allied  metres  are  very  rarely  found  outside 
the  strophic  system ;  but  there  are  three  hymns  near  the  end  of  the 
tenth  Mandala  which  are  so  composed,  namely  x  140,  144,  and  150.  In 
x  140  the  first  two  stanzas  are  Vistdrajmnkti  (8.12.12.8),  stanzas  3-5 
Satobrhati,  and  6  is  Uparistajj yotis  (12.12.12.8).     In  x  144  the  first 


The  Atyasti  group  237 

two  of  these  metres  are  combined  with  Bihati  and  Gayatri.     In  x  150 
a  BrhatI  triplet  is  followed  by  two  stanzas  in  Uparistdjjyotis. 

All  these  hymns  must  necessarily  be  referred  to  a  very  early  Vedic 
period. 

247.  The  Atyasti  metre  is  the  most  common  form  of  a  group 
of  lyric  metres,  which  are  characterized  by  the  large  number  of 
verses  included  in  one  stanza.  The  whole  group  may  be  regarded 
as  a  developement  of  the  Satobrhati  metre  in  its  extended  form 
12.8.12.8.12.8  (§  246  ii)  or  through  the  metre  of  v  87 
(12.12.12.8.8). 

The  Atyasti  group  of  metres  is  amongst  the  latest  productions 
of  the  archaic  period,  and  presupposes  a  long  developement  of  the 
lyric  stanza  :  but  the  view  entertained  by  many  Western  critics 
that  hymns  in  these  metres  belong  to  the  later  additions  to  the 
Rigveda  is  entirely  untenable.  A  correct  appreciation  of  this 
metre  is  given  by  A.  Ludwig,  Rigveda  iv,  xxxi-xxxii. 

(i)  There  are  about  20  varieties  of  stanza  belonging  to  the  Atyasti 
group  :  their  common  features  are  that  they  have  at  least  five  verses  to 
the  stanza,  of  which  two  at  least  are  trimeter  and  two  at  least  dimeter, 
and  that  (with  rare  exceptions)  the  stanza  begins  with  a  trimeter  and 
ends  with  a  dimeter  verse. 

The  standard  Atyasti  metre,  of  which  the  type  is  12.  12.8  |  8.8| 
12  .  8 .  8  is  as  common  as  all  the  rest  put  together,  but  on  account  of  its 
length  it  must  be  regarded  as  almost  the  latest  in  developement. 

(ii)  Hymns  composed  in  standard  Atyasti  triplets  are  i  130,  132, 
134,  136,  and  ix  111  :  v  87  consists  of  triplets  of  stanzas  of  the 
type  12.  12  j  12.  8.  8:  i  137  of  a  triplet  of  the  type  8.8.8J8.8J12.8: 
and  i  135  of  triplets  which  are  chiefly  Atyasti,  but  partly  of  an  allied 
type  (12 .  12  .  8  |  12  .  12  .  8).  Hymns  i  130  and  136  have  each  also  an 
appended  Tristubh  stanza. 

Other  hymns  in  Atyasti  are  i  127-129,  131,  133  6-7,  138,  139,  in 
which  the  following  stanzas  differ  from  the  standard:  i  127  6,  129 
8,  9,  133  6;  whilst  i  139  s  is  a  Bihati  stanza.  See  Appendix  III 
(§  253)  Nos.  74,  77,  80,  81,  85,  and  88. 

The  triplet  iv  1  1-3  consists  of  mixed  metres  of  this  group,  and  is 
followed  by  a  Tristubh  hymn.  See  Appendix  III  (§  253)  Nos.  62, 
75,  and  83. 

(iii)  In  ii  22  we  have  a  metre  which  seems  to  be  similar  in 
principle  to  Atyasti.  In  stanzas  2  and  3  the  type  is  12.4  |  12.4  | 
12.8.  8,  but  the  last  two  dimeter  verses  (which  belong  to  a  refrain)  are 
unrhythmical.  The  first  stanza  only  differs  by  having  an  additional 
verse  of  four  syllables  after  e.  The  concluding  stanza  is  in  the  text  of 
the  type  24  |  1'2 .  4  |  12.  8  .  4  |  :  but  it  is  probable  that  the  first 
section  admits  of  some  analysis.  .See  Appendix  III  (§  253)  Nos.  79, 
84,  and  87. 


238  Disordered  grouping 

(iv)  In  viii  35-37  the  metres  appear  to  be  allied,  viii  35 
(12.12.12.8)  does  not  indeed  come  within  our  definition  in  sub- 
section i,  and  has  points  of  contact  with  the  uneven  lyric  metres :  but 
viii  36  i-6  is  of  the  type  12.12  |  8.8.8.8,  and  the  concluding  stanza 
only  differs  in  having  one  dimeter  verse  less.  For  the  similar  metres 
found  in  viii  37  see  Appendix  III  (§  253)  Nos.  70  and  71. 

248.  The  grouping  of  stanzas  is  so  regular  in  those  hymns  in 
which  the  lyric  metres  are  used,  that  some  disorder  in  the  text 
may  be  suspected  where  an  arrangement  in  triplets  or  strophes 
does  not  come  to  light.  Such  hymns  are  v  53,  viii  30,  and  viii  46. 
In  addition  the  Astarapankti  hymns  of  Vimada  (x  21,  24  1-3,  25) 
shew  no  clear  indication  of  grouping. 

(i)  v  53.  In  this  hymn  stanza  4  may  be  interpreted  as  Kakubh 
by  reading  vdHau  in  4a  (§  170  iii),  and  thus  the  number  of  the  detached 
Kakubh  stanzas  (1,  4,  10,  11)  becomes  equal  to  that  of  the  detached 
Satobrhati  stanzas  (7,  9,  13,  14).  As  there  are  also  two  strophes  (5-6, 
15-16)  in  the  hymn,  and  only  4  stanzas  of  quite  different  type,  it  seems 
probable  that  the  original  hymn  was  composed  entirely  in  Kakubh- 
Satobrhatl,  but  has  not  been  faithfully  preserved. 

(ii)  viii  30.  Here  a  triplet  in  mixed  metres  (1  Gayatri,  2 
Purausnih,  3  BrhatI)  is  followed  by  an  appended  Anustubh  stanza. 

(iii)  viii  46.  This  is  the  most  varied  hymn  in  the  Rigvecla,  but 
contains  many  groups.  1—6  Gayatri  triplets  :  5  is  in  the  text  Dimeter 
Kakubh,  but  probably  suvlricwn  should  be  omitted.  7  Dim.  BrhatI. 
8  Anustubh.  9  Satobrhati.  10  Gayatri.  11-12  BrhatI  followed 
by  stanza  8.12.8.12  in  place  of  Satobrhati.  13  Dvipada  Jagatl. 
14  is  a  Satobrhati  stanza:  the  first  verse  is  hypersyllabic,  and  the 
fourth  is  represented  only  by  the  initial  word  ydthti.  15  as  13  :  omit 
the  concluding  words  nundm  dtha.  16  probably  the  same  as  14,  but 
requiring  considerable  restoration.  17  The  type  is  12  .  12  j  12  .  8  .  8,  as 
in  v  87  :  the  third  verse  requires  restoration.  18  Uparistadbrhati. 
19-20  BrhatI.  20  is  either  disordered  or  is  in  uneven  lyric  metre. 
21  Parikti.  22  Stanza  of  type  12  .  8  j  8  .  8  .  8  representing  Satobrhati. 
23  Gayatri.  24  Pankti.  25-28  Brhatl-SatobrhatI  strophes.  29-33 
Dimeter  stanzas,  except  that  30a  is  trimeter:  in  31c  said  should 
perhaps  be  omitted.  It  seems  probable  that  stanzas  1  to  12  are 
arranged  in  triplets,  and  13  to  28  in  strophes  each  containing  two 
stanzas. 

249.  The  internal  structure  or  rhythm  of  decasyllabic  verses 
has  been  examined  in  the  last  chapter  (§§  228-230).  It  there- 
fore only  remains  here  to  consider  the  building  up  of  such 
verses  into  stanzas  and  strophes  in  the  hymns  that  have  already 
been  distinguished  as  composed  in  decasyllabic  metres,  and  to 
measure  the  extent  to  which  these  hymns  are  differentiated  from 
the  less  regular  trimeter  hymns  from  which  they  have  originated. 


The  Penta/l  metre  230 

The  most  important  of  these  metres  is  the  '  Dvipada  Viraj '  or 
1  Pentad '  metre.  There  are  a  few  hymns  in  which  Pentad  and 
Tristubh  verses  are  combined  :  but  in  the  greater  number  Tristubh 
verses  are  so  rare  that  they  may  practically  be  disregarded.  In 
these,  which  we  may  call  the  pure  Pentad  hymns,  we  observe  that 
the  original  trimeter  verse  is  split,  and  becomes  two  verses :  and 
these  two  exercise  a  mutual  influence  which  tends  towards  their 
complete  assimilation.  This  point  seems  to  be  reached  in  the 
metre  of  iv  10,  in  which  three  pentads  are  followed  by  a  Tristubh 
verse  in  each  stanza.  Pentad  hymns  are  usually  arranged  in 
strophes  of  ten  stanzas,  each  of  which  consists  of  two  trimeter 
verses  or  four  pentads. 

(i)  The  mixed  Pentad  hymns  are  vi  44  7-9,  x  1,6,  and  4G.  In 
these  hymns  about  two-thirds  of  the  verses  are  ordinal  Tristubh 
verses,  and  of  the  remainder  three-quarters  are  Pentad  verses  and  one- 
quarter  belong  to  other  decasyllabic  types.  The  stanzas  consist  of  four 
trimeter  verses,  and  the  two  parts  of  each  verse  retain  their  original 
character :  thus  the  quantity  of  the  third  syllable  is  indifferent,  but  the 
ninth  is  almost  invariably  short.  The  strophe-formation  varies :  the 
first  hymn  named  consists  of  a  triplet,  the  second  and  third  of  seven 
stanzas  each,  and  only  the  last  of  ten  stanzas. 

(ii)  The  'pure  Pentad'  hymns  are  i  65-70,  vii  34  1-21,  56  i-it, 
and  ix  109.  These  hymns  contain  together  over  200  verses,  of  which 
only  nine  are  Tristubh  verses.  In  vii  34  and  56  the  seventh  syllable 
(the  initial  syllable  of  the  second  Pentad)  is  long  in  one-third  of  the 
instances,  in  the  other  hymns  in  one-half :  but  here  the  effects  of  the 
'rest'  and  of  assimilation  coincide.  The  third  syllable,  almost  in- 
different in  quantity  in  trimeter  verse,  is  in  these  hymns  short  in 
almost  three-quarters  of  the  instances  :  whilst  the  corresponding  ninth 
syllable,  always  short  in  trimeter  verse,  is  in  these  hymns  long  in  one- 
seventh  of  the  instances  (§220  iii) :  these  two  changes  appear  to  be 
due  to  mutual  assimilation. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  fifth  syllable  is  long  in  three-quarters  of 
the  instances,  so  that  (in  spite  of  the  tendency  to  assimilate)  this 
syllable  does  not  become  syllaba  anceps. 

All  the  Pentad  hymns  are  arranged  in  strophes  consisting  of  five 
double  stanzas,  but  some  add  a  final  stanza,  so  that  the  total  number  is 
10,  11,  or  21.  In  ix  109  there  is  also  an  additional  stanza  in  another 
metre  (8.4.8)  which  hardly  seems  to  belong  to  the  hymn.  The 
number  of  stanzas  in  the  strophe  thus  corresponds  exactly  to  the 
number  of  syllables  in  the  verse. 

(iii)  The  metre  found  in  iv  10  consists  of  three  Pentads  followed 
by  a  Tristubh  verse,  as  for  instance  : 

dgne  tdm  adyd 
dsvarii  nd  stomaih 
krdtum  nd  bhadrdm 
hrdispfsam  |(  rdhidma  ta  ohaih. 


240  The  Viratsthana  metre 

In  the  fifth  stanza  there  are  four  Pentads  besides  the  Tristubh 
verse,  the  last  of  these  being  evidently  a  repetition  of  the  third. 

The  rhythm  of  the  first  pentad  in  each  stanza  is  the  same  as  in  the 
Pentad  hymns,  and  that  of  the  last  pentad  (the  last  two  in  stanza  5) 
the  same  as  in  the  second  pentad  in  those  hymns.  As  to  the  middle 
pentad  it  is  hardly  possible  to  make  a  safe  inference  from  8  occurrences 
only :  so  far  as  can  be  observed,  the  quantity  both  in  the  third  and  in 
the  fifth  place  is  indifferent. 

The  strophe-formation  is  very  uncertain  :  perhaps  we  have  a  strophe 
of  five  stanzas  followed  by  a  triplet. 

250.  The  remaining  hymns  in  decasyllabic  metre  are  ii  11 
(Viratsthana)  and  x  77,  78  (Bhargavi)  :  to  which  may  perhaps  be 
added  i  61  as  shewing  at  least  the  beginnings  of  a  new  decasyllabic 
stanza  (Gautami).  Although  none  of  these  metres  become  estab- 
lished in  the  same  way  as  the  Pentad  metre,  they  appear  to  be 
clearly  conceived  by  the  poets  in  the  special  hymns  in  which  they 
appear. 

An  arrangement  in  strophes  of  five  stanzas  is  probable. 

(i)  The  hymn  ii  1 1  consists  of  20  Viratsthana  stanzas  followed  by 
one  Tristubh  stanza :  it  therefore  corresponds  in  the  number  of  stanzas 
with  the  Pentad  hymns  vii  34  and  ix  109. 

Of  the  80  verses  in  the  Viratsthana  stanzas  43  must  necessarily  be 
read  as  Viratsthana  verses ;  8  more  if  indra  is  read  (as  seems  certain  in 
this  hymn)  as  a  disyllable,  and  yet  8  more  if  we  abstain  from  resolutions 
which  are  permissible  but  not  necessary  :  so  that  we  have  59  verses  or 
three-quarters  of  the  whole  number  which  are  of  the  Viratsthana  type. 
The  verses  in  which  we  abstain  from  possible  resolutions  are  2d  {ukthaih 
§  151  iii),  4d  (ddslh  §  151  i),  5a  (guhyam  §  136  ii),  5c  (dytim  §  142  ii), 
12a  (dpy  abhuma  §  125),  13a  (sydma  §  147),  15a  (yyantu  §  140  iii),  19d 
(sdkhydsya§  137). 

Of  the  remaining  verses  12  have  the  Viratsthana  ending,  but  appear 
to  have  five  syllables  in  the  opening.  Here,  if  the  text  is  correct,  we 
seem  to  have  contamination  of  the  two  metres.  Bub  in  4c  6a  it  is 
possible  to  omit  indra  as  a  gloss,  and  in  6b  it  seems  desirable  to  read 
stand  for  stavdma  :  in  3a  17a  ukthesu  nu,  ugresu  nti  seem  more  probable 
than  ukthesvid  nu,  ugresvid  nu.  In  9d  10b  12d  13c  17b  19a  20a  the 
verse  certainly  has  eleven  syllables.  There  are  4  regular  Tristubh 
verses  only,  namely  Id  2b  8d  12b,  and  5  which  shew  various  irregu- 
larities other  than  those  alread}^  described,  namely  3b  7d  lOd  15c  17d. 

In  the  Viratsthana  verses  the  seventh  syllable  is  usually  short. 

(ii)  The  Bhargavi  hymns  x  77,  78  each  consist  of  eight  stanzas, 
and  in  each  case  only  five  stanzas  out  of  the  eight  shew  the  special 
metre.  It  is  natural  therefore  to  regard  these  hymns  as  composite : 
x  77  consisting  of  a  Bhargavi  strophe  of  five  stanzas  followed  by  a 
Tristubh  triplet,  and  x  78  of  a  similar  strophe  followed  by  a  Jagati 
triplet,  of  which,  however,  the  last  stanza  is  Tristubh.  On  this 
supposition  it  becomes  necessary  to  transpose  stanzas  5  and  6  in  x  78. 


The  Bhdrgavl  metre  241 

In  the  Bhargavl  strophes  there  are  14  verses  out  of  30  which  do 
not  conform  to  either  of  the  Bhargavl  types  (§  52) :  of  these  verses  5 
have  eleven  syllables  and  9  have  twelve,  but  all  agree  in  shewing  Jagati 
cadence.  There  can  therefore  be  no  doubt  that  we  have  to  deal  with  a 
variation  of  Jagati  verse,  though  the  Anukramani  by  means  of  count- 
ing the  syllables  discovers  most  of  them  to  be  Tristubh. 

Between  the  two  types  of  Bhargavl  verse  it  is  impossible  to 
distinguish  satisfactorily,  as  a  large  proportion  of  the  verses  may 
be  classed  with  either,  according  as  we  place  the  caesura  before  or 
after  nd. 

(iii)  In  i  61  the  regular  Tristubh  verses  number  30  out  of  63,  or 
rather  less  than  half,  the  Viratsthana  verses  are  10  in  number,  Gautami 
verses  9,  and  other  irregular  verses  14.  No  special  importance  would 
attach  to  the  Gautami  verses,  except  for  their  extreme  rarity  in  other 
parts  of  the  Rigveda :  as  it  is,  there  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  create 
a  new  type  similar  to  Viratsthana :  and  in  stanza  1 3  no  less  than  three 
verses  out  of  four  are  of  this  type,  as  follows  : 

asyed  u        •  n  prd  bruhi  purvidni 
turdsya         •  n  kdrmdni  ndvya  ukthaih 
yudhe  ydd  •  u  isndnd  ayudhani 
rghaydmdno  \\  ni  rinati  sdtrun. 

The  hymn  consists  of  three  strophes  each  of  five  stanzas,  and  an 
appended  Tristubh  stanza. 

251.  In  the  great  body  of  Tristubh  and  Jagati  verse  in  the 
Rigveda  we  look  in  vain  for  any  strophic  arrangement.  Occasionally 
there  appear  indications  of  a  grouping  in  three,  five,  seven,  and 
ten  (or  eleven)  stanzas,  but  the  varieties  are  so  numerous  that  it 
is  quite  possible  to  explain  them  as  due  to  chance. 

Jagati  hymns  often  have  a  concluding  Tristubh  stanza,  and 
some  of  the  longer  hymns  have  one  or  two  such  stanzas  towards 
the  end.  It  is  open  to  question  whether  this  habit  has  any  con- 
nexion with  grouping  in  strophes. 

(i)  Tristubh  and  Jagati  triplets  might  be  expected  in  the  earlier 
parts  of  the  Rigveda,  but  the  traces  of  them  are  few.  They  are 
probable  in  vi  15  1-15,  44  13-24,  and  in  the  Soma  hymns  ix  86  and  97. 
Where  the  stanza  consists  of  three  verses  only  (§  94  iv),  the  triplet 
grouping  seems  to  be  more  regular,  as  in  vii  22,  31  10-12,  68;  ix  110  4—12. 
In  viii  9  10-12  a  triplet  is  composed  of  a  Tristubh,  a  Viraj,  and  a  Jagati 
stanza. 

(ii)  Strophes  of  five  stanzas  are  certainly  found  in  the  group  of 
Indra  hymns  extending  from  vi  30  to  vi  41,  and  are  further  probable 
in  iii  17-23,  44-50,  iv  27-29,  ix  75-84.     See  also  subsection  v. 

(iii)  Strophes  of  seven  stanzas  appear  to  belong  rather  to  the  later 
periods   of   the  Rigveda,   and    may   perhaps    be    associated  with   the 

a.  16 


242 


Possible  trimeter  strophes 


conduct  of  the  sacrifice  by  the  saptd  hotdrah.     The  Apriya  hymns  in 
their  original  form  must  have  consisted  of  seven  stanzas  only,  and  the 


hymns 


:,  17,  and  ix  5  1-7  are  of  this  type,  though  additional 


verses  have  been  added  at  a  later  period  to  two  of  these  three  hymns. 
Other  probable  examples,  all  in  Tristubh  metre,  are  the  hymns  vi  7—9, 
x  1-7,  79,  80,  *81-84,  and  *87  1-21V 

(iv)  Groups  of  ten  stanzas  are  probably  due  to  the  influence  of  the 
Pentad  hymns  (§  249)  :  they  may  be  traced  in  i  71-73  ;  iii  5-7, 
34-36;  iv  19-23;  ix  68-70.  Hymns  of  eleven  stanzas  may  be 
explained  in  the  same  way,  by  the  addition  of  a  concluding  stanza : 
possible  examples  are  i  53,  54,  185,  186  ;       x  48,  49. 

(v)  Hymns  of  15  and  20  stanzas  are  more  common  in  the  Rigveda 
than  those  which  contain  an  intermediate  number,  and  thus  indirectly 
suggest  strophes  of  five  stanzas  each.  Such  hymns  are  i  32,  33,  51,  52, 
121,  122  J  ii  33-35 ;  iv  1,  2,  4,  5 ;  v  29,  30,  41,  43,  54  ;  vi  49, 
50;  *vii  35  ;  x  91,  92.  The  hymns  i  116,  117  each  contain  25 
stanzas. 

(vi)  There  are  about  170  Jagati  hymns  in  the  Rigveda:  of  these 
nearly  100  are  composed  in  JagatT  alone,  about  40  have  a  concluding 
Tristubh  verse,  and  about  35  have  some  further  admixture  of  Tristubh. 

The  relation  of  these  varieties  is  shewn  in  the  annexed  Table.  In 
the  archaic  period  irregular  combinations  of  Jagati  and  Tristubh  are 
proportionately  common,  corresponding  to  the  uneven  lyric  metres  :  in 
the  strophic  and  normal  periods  pure  Jagati  is  most  common,  but  in 
the  latter  the  use  of  final  Tristubh  stanzas  begins  to  assert  itself,  and 
leads  to  greater  irregularities  in  the  two  last  periods.  The  history  of 
contamination  within  the  stanza  is  exactly  similar  :  see  §  223. 


Table  shewing  the  varieties  of  Jagati  verse. 


Period 

Arch. 

Stroph. 

Norm. 

Cretic 

Popular 

| 

Total 

Pure  Jagati 

Jagati  with  final  Tristubh 

Mixed  Jagati 

11 
3 

7 

10 
2 
1 

48 

17 

6 

24 

15 
19 

5 
3 
3 

98 
40 
36 

21 

13 

71 

58 

11 

174 

252.  Upon  a  general  view  of  the  developement  of  the 
externa]  structure  of  the  verse  it  may  be  said  that  the  archaic 
period  is  characterized  by  irregularity  and  variety,-  the  strophic 
period  by  regularity  and  variety :  and  that  the  normal  and  cretic 
periods  are  marked  by  regularity  only.  From  the  Western  point 
of  view  the  metrical  history  of  the  earlier  periods  possesses  an 
interest  which  is  wanting  later :  for  the  varied  forms  of  the  stanza 


Decay  of  the  strophe  243 

have  their  counterparts  in  modern  metres,  whilst  the  developement 
of  the  internal  structure  appears  artificial  and  even  pedantic.  It 
is  therefore  perhaps  not  too  much  to  claim  a  more  human  interest 
for  the  earlier  poetry  :  but  on  the  other  hand  it  may  be  said  that 
the  metrical  powers  of  the  Vedic  poets  were  not  lessened  in  the 
later  periods,  though  they  were  diverted  into  directions  which 
appeal  less  readily  to  modern  sympathies. 


16—2 


APPENDIX  III. 


THE  VARIOUS   FORMS   OF  THE  STANZA. 

253.  The  following  list  shews  the  various  forms  of  the  stanza 
which  occur  in  the  Rigveda.  For  convenience  of  reference  they  are 
arranged  in  the  ascending  order  of  the  number  of  verses  in  the  stanza, 
and  of  the  number  of  syllables  in  each  verse  in  order.  The  titles  given 
in  the  Anukramam  are  given  when  they  are  practically  convenient, 
but  omitted  when  they  are  misleading.  New  titles  are  given  within 
square  brackets. 

The  number  of  verses  in  the  stanza  varies  from  two  to  eight.  In 
the  Samhita  text  the  single  verses  iv  17  15,  v  41  20,  42  17,  43  16,  and 
vi  63  11  are  treated  as  stanzas,  but  in  each  case  the  verse  really  belongs 
to  the  preceding  stanza.  The  verse  x  20  1  is  not  a  stanza,  but  an 
abbreviated  quotation  of  x  25  1. 


A.    Stanzas  of  two  verses. 

1 .  Type  8.8:  Dvipadd  Gayatrl.  A  variation  of  Gayatri,  occur- 
ring in  ix  67  16-18.  The  three  stanzas  are  together  equivalent  to  a 
Mahapaiikti  stanza. 

2.  Type  8.12.  Stanzas  apparently  of  this  type  seem  always  to  be 
capable  of  resolution  into  three  verses :  see  Nos.  6  and  8. 

3.  Type  11.11:  Dvipadd  Tristubh.  This  stanza  occurs  vi  47-25, 
vii  17,  *x  157  2—5  :  also  according  to  the  text  in  vi  10  7,  17  15,  but 
these  verses  may  more  appropriately  be  considered  as  parts  of  the 
stanzas  preceding :  see  No.  69. 

4.  Type  12.8:  [Dvipadd  Satobrhati],  This  metre  is  regularly 
used  in  viii  29,  and  also  appears  in  the  text  in  viii  46  30.  In  other 
instances  the  verses  seem  to  belong  to  a  preceding  Satobrhati  stanza : 
see  No.  72.     In  *x  157  1  the  corresponding  type  11  .  8  is  found. 

5.  Type  12.  12  :  [Dvipada  Jagati].  A  possible  interpretation  of 
the  stanzas  viii  46  13,  15. 


Forms  of  the  stanza  246 

B.  Stanzas  of  three  verses. 

6.  Type  8.4.8:  ix  109  27,  x  172  3. 

7.  Type  8.8.3:  occurs  v  24  in  a  hymn  of  four  verses,  of  which 
the  first  is  of  the  type  8.8.4:  see  §  242  iii. 

8.  Type  8.  8.  4:  x  172  i,  2,  4. 

9.  Type  8.8.8:  Gdyatrl.  Common  in  all  periods  ;  see  Ch.  vn 
throughout :  for  the  strophes  see  §  245  iii. 

10.  Type  8.8.11:  probably  aimed  at  in  i  150,  see  §  242  ii. 

11.  Type  8.8.12:   TJsnih.     Regularly  used  in  triplets,  §  245  i. 

12.  Type  8. 12  .8  :  Kakubh.  For  the  use  in  lyric  triplets  see 
§§  245  ii,  246  i ;  in  the  Kakubh-SatobrhatI  strophe  §  246  ii. 

13.  Type  11.7.11.     Used  in  x  105,  see  §  244  iii. 

14.  Type  11.8.8.  This  uneven  lyric  stanza  occurs  in  x  93  2,  for 
which  see  §  243  v  :  an  occurrence  in  the  popular  Rigveda  *iv  57  5  may 
be  due  to  some  error  in  the  text.  It  is  possible  that  this  is  also  the 
metre  aimed  at  in  ix  67  30,  where  each  of  the  last  two  verses  has  nine 
syllables. 

15.  Type  11.11.7.  This  uneven  lyric  metre  is  imperfectly  pre- 
served in  i  120  1-9  :  see  §  244  ii. 

16.  Type  11 .  11  .  11:  Virdj  [Tripadd  Tristubh],  This  metre  is 
established  in  the  strophic  period,  and  the  stanzas  are  usually  grouped 
in  triplets  :  see  §  251  i.  Hymns  not  so  arranged  are  i  149,  iii  25, 
vii  1  1-20.     This  stanza  occurs  in  i  120  3  in  place  of  No.  15. 

17.  Type  12.8.8:  Purausnih.  This  stanza  usually  occurs  as  the 
last  in  a  lyric  triplet;  see  §  245  ii :  other  occurrences  are  vi  48  13, 
viii  30  2.  Occurrences  in  the  popular  Rigveda  are  doubtful,  but  appear 
in  the  text  as  *i  23  19,  *vii  66  16. 

18.  Type  12.  8. 12.  This  stanza  occurs  in  ix  110  1-3,  and  is 
perhaps  the  basis  of  viii  46  14  (13.8.  14). 

19.  Type  12  .  12.  12  :  \ Tripadd  Jagatl].  This  stanza  is  found  in 
triplets  in  ix  110  4-6,  7-9. 

C.  Stanzas  of  four  verses. 

20.  Type  5.5.5.5:  Dvipadd  Virdj  [Pentad].     See  §  249. 

21.  Type  5.5.5.11:  Padapahkti.  A  variation  of  No.  20,  occur- 
ring in  iv  10  :  see  §  249  iii. 

22.  Type  8.4.8.8:  [Dimeter  Purausnih].  This  stanza  is  found 
in  the  text  in  viii  28  4,  46  5  :  in  each  case  the  short  verse  is  perhaps  a 
gloss,  and  the  stanza  really  Gayatri. 

23.  Type  8.8.4.8:  [Dimeter  Kakubh].  Occurs  viii  22  n,  as  a 
variation  of  Kakubh  in  the  usual  strophe  :  see  §  246  ii. 

24.  Type  8.8.8.4:  [Dimeter  Usnih].  For  the  occurrences  see 
§  192,  and  for  the  arrangement  in  strophes  §  245  i. 

25.  Type  8.8.8.8:  Anustubh.     See  Ch.  vn  throughout. 


246  Stanzas  of  four  verses 

26.  Type  8.8.12.8:  Brlwtl.  Most  regularly  in  the  Brhall-tiato- 
brhatl  strophe,  see  §  246  iii  :  occasionally  in  triplets,  §  246  iv  •  in 
homogeneous  hymns  and  in  detached  verses,  §  246  iv. 

27.  Type  8.8.12.12.  In  viii  10  4  this  stanza  represents  Sato- 
brhati :  see  §  246  iii.  In  *x  170  4  it  is  probably  the  accidental  result 
of  contamination  of  Anustubh  and  Jagati  verse  ;  cf.  Nos.  35,  39,  46. 

28.  Type  8.11.11.11.  A  stanza  of  this  type  is  found  in  the  text 
v  19  5  :  either  it  is  to  be  read  as  a  Pankti  verse  by  omitting  vayund  in 
b,  or  it  is  parallel  to  No.  8  :  see  §  244  iv. 

29.  Type  8.  12 . 8. 8  :  Skandhogrlvl.  Occurs  i  175  1  in  an 
Anustubh  hymn. 

30.  Type  8  .  12  .  8.  12  :  Viparita.  This  stanza  represents  Sato- 
brhati in  viii  46   12  :  see  §  246  iii. 

31.  Type  S.  12  .  12  .  8  :  Vixtarapankti.  This  stanza  is  equivalent 
to  Satobrhati  and  is  used  in  connexion  with  it:  it  occurs  x  140  l,  2, 
144  6:  see  §  246  v. 

32.  The  type  9.9.8.8  occurs  i  187  11.  It  is  perhaps  only  au 
accidental  variation  of  Anustubh. 

33.  Type  10.  10.  10.  10  :  Viratstltana.  In  ii  11  ;  complete  stanzas 
are  rare,  but  one  is  quoted  in  §  50.     See  §  250  i. 

34.  Type  10 .  10  .  10  .  10  :  [Gautami\.  There  is  no  complete  stanza, 
but  i  61  13  is  nearly  complete.     See  §  250  iii. 

35.  Type  11.8.8.8:  Purastadbrhatl.  This  important  uneven 
lyric  metre  is  regularly  used  in  x  22  (§  243)  and  may  probably  be 
restored  in  x  93  3,  13  (§  242  v.).  The  occurrence  in  *x  17  13  is  perhaps 
accidental :  cf.  Nos.  27,  39,  and  46. 

36.  Type  11.8.11.8:  Visamdpada.  This  appears  to  be  an  un- 
even lyric  metre,  but  only  occurs  in  viii  46  20 :  see  §  244  iv. 

37.  The  type  11.11.7.7  occurs  i  120  4,  and  is  a  variation  of 

No.   15. 

38.  Type  11 .  11.7.11.  This  is  an  uneven  lyric  metre,  similar  to 
No.  13  :  it  is  found  in  i  88  5  (§  244  i),  and  in  x  132  3,  4,  5  (§  242  vi). 

39.  Type  11 .  11 .  8  .  8.  This  important  uneven  lyric  metre  is 
found  in  i  88  6  (§  244  i)  and  in  x  93  r,  4,  14  (§  242  v).  Cf.  Nos.  38  and 
46.     For  the  occurrence  in  *i  164  42  cf.  Nos.  27,  35  and  46. 

40.  Type  11.11.8.11.  This  occurs  in  i  88  1  (§  244  i),  and  in  the 
text  in  i  122  5. 

41.  Type  11.11.11.8.  This  is  found  in  the  text  in  iii  21  4  :  see 
§  244  iv. 

.  42.     Type  11.11.11.11:   Tristubh.     See  Ch.  viii  throughout. 

43.  Type  12.8.8.8.  This  variation  of  No.  35,  for  which  it  has 
suggested  a  title,  is  only  found  in  x  93  15. 

44.  Type  12  .  8  .  12  .  8  :  Satobrhati.  This  stanza  is  almost  ex- 
clusively found  in  strophes  (occasionally  in  triplets)  combined  either 
with  Kakubh  or  with  Brhati :  see  §  246. 


Stanzas  of  Jive  verses  i&gt;47 

45.     Type  12.8.  12.  12  :  Madhyejyotis.      This  variation    of    E 
brhati  is  found  in  viii  10  2,  22  12  :  see  §  246  ii  iii. 

4  6.     Type  12.12.8.8:  Prastdrapaiikti     This  stanza  is  closely  OOO- 
nected  with  No.  39,  and  is  found  frequently  in  x  93  and  132,  and  as  the 
concluding  verse  of   a  triplet  in  vii  96  3.       See  §§  242  v  vi,    246  i. 
There  is  an  occurrence  in  the  popular  Rigveda  in  *x  18  u  :  cf.  Nos  27 
35  and  39. 

47.  Type  12.  12,12.8:  Uparistdjjyotis.  This  is  a  variation  of 
Satobrhati,  the  regular  metre  of  viii  35,  and  also  found  in  viii  103  5, 
and  x  140  6,  144  5,  and  150  4,  5.  In  x  140  6  it  is  described  in  the 
Anukramani  as  Tristubh.     See  §  246  v. 

48.  Type  12  .  12.  12.  12  :  Jagatl.  Common  only  in  the  normal 
and  cretic  periods,  see  §  114  Note  4  :  even  in  these  the  metre  is  almost 
unknown  to  Kusika  (Mandala  iii).  See  Chapter  viii  throughout.  For 
the  relation  to  Tristubh  see  §  251  vi. 

49.  The  type  12 .  12 .  14  .  12  appears  to  occur  in  viii  97  10  :  cf.  the 
next  No. 

50.  Type  13.  13.  13.  13  :  Atijayatl.  A  complete  stanza  is  found 
viii  97  13  :  and  the  two  following  stanzas  appear  to  aim  at  the  same 
result. 

51.  Type  20.  11  .  11  .  11.  This  is  found  in  *vii  50  4,  and  invites 
emendation. 

D.     Stanzas  of  five  verses. 

52.  Type  5.5.5.5.11  :  Mahdpadapankti.  This  stanza  occurs  in 
iv  10  5,  and  is  an  extension  of  No.  21. 

53.  Type  8.8.8.4.8  [Dimeter  Brhati].  This  variation  of  No.  25 
occurs  viii  46  7,  62  7-9. 

54.  Type  8.8.8.8.4:  Uparistddbrhatl.  This  variation  of  No. 
25  is  the  only  lyric  metre  which  is  found  mostly  in  the  later  parts  of 
the  Rigveda:  it  occurs  *vii  55  2-4;  viii  46  18,  97  n,  12;  x  126  1-7 
(5  irregular). 

55.  Type  8.8.8.8.8:  Pahkti.  This  metre  was  originally  an 
extension  of  No.  25,  and  only  used  in  concluding  stanzas  of  Anustubh 
hymns  :  but  it  is  found  as  an  independent  metre  in  i  29,  80,  81,  82  1-5, 
84  10-12,  105  ;  v  6,  75,  79  ;  viii  31  15-18,  39,  46  ai,  24  j  and  in  the 
popular  Rigveda  in  *x  86. 

56.  Type  8.8.12.8.8:  Mahdbrhatl.  This  occurs  i  105  8;  vi  48  7 ; 
and  is  a  variation  of  No.  26.     See  §  246  iii. 

57.  Type  11.7.7.11.11.  This  extension  of  No.  12  is  found  in 
x  105  11  :  see  §  244  iii. 

58.  Type  11.11.11.11.11:  Sakvarl.  This  extension  of  the 
Tristubh  stanza  is  fairly  common  in  the  archaic  period,  and  occasional 
later  :  it  occurs  iv  17  14-15,  27  3  ;  v  2  12,  41  16-17,  19-20,  42  16-17, 
43  15-16;     vi  2  11,  15  15,  31  4,  49  15,  63io-n  ;     x  115  9.     Seeg  94  iv. 

59.  Type  12  .  8  |  8.8:8:  viii  35  23  (cf.  No.  49),  46  22,  and  x  93  9 
(cf.  No.  48). 


248  Stanzas  of  six  verses 

60.  Type  12.8  |  12.8.8:  Mahdsatobrhati.  This  stanza  is  an  ex- 
tension of  No.  44,  and  takes  its  place  in  the  strophe  (§  246  iii)  in  vi  48 
6,  8,  2i. 

61.  Type  12.  12  |  8.8.8.  This  stanza  is  only  found  in  viii  36  7 
=  37  7,  and  x  132  7.     See  §  242  vi. 

62.  Type  12.12.8.12.8.  A  stanza  belonging  to  the  Atyasti 
group,  and  found  in  iv  1   2.     See  §  247  ii. 

63.  Type  12 .  12  |  .12  .8.8.  This  stanza  is  regularly  employed  in 
v  87,  and  is  also  found  in  vi  48  15,  viii  46  17.  It  occupies  an  inter- 
mediate position  between  Satobrhati  (No.  44)  and  the  Atyasti  group  : 
see  §  245  ii. 

64.  Type  12 .  12  |  12  .  12  .  8.  This  is  an  extension  of  the  Jagati 
stanza,  found  in  vi  15  3. 

65.  Type  12. 12  |  12. 12. 12  [Pancapadd  Jagati].  This  exten- 
sion of  the  Jagati  stanza  is  found  in  *ii  43  2  and  vi  15  6. 


E.    Stanzas  of  six  verses. 

66.  Type  8.8  |  8.4.8.4:  Astdrapankti.  This  extension  of  the 
Anustubh  stanza  is  peculiar  to  the  Vimada  group,  being  found  in  x  21, 
24  1-3,  and  25  :  see  §  248. 

67.  Type  8.8  |  8.4.8.8.  This  stanza  is  found,  perhaps  by  some 
error  in  the  text,  in  *i  191  13.     Cf.  No.  54. 

68.  Type  8.8  |  8.8  |  8.8:  Mahdpahkti.  This  metre  first  appears 
as  an  extension  of  an  Anustubh  stanza  in  v  86  6 ;  it  is  used  in  associa- 
tion with  Paiikti  in  *x  59  9,  10.  As  an  independent  metre  or  associated 
with  a  still  longer  stanza  it  appears  not  to  be  earlier  than  the  normal 
period,  and  occurs  in  viii  39-41,  x  133  4-6,  134  1-6.  The  grouping  of 
the  verses  varies,  even  in  the  same  hymn. 

69.  Type  11.11  |  11.11.11.11.  This  stanza  is  not  recognized  in 
the  Samhita  text,  but  is  a  probable  interpretation  of  the  pairs  of  stanzas 
which  appear  as  vi  10  6-7,  17  14-15. 

70.  Type  12.4.8  |  12.4.8.  This  occurs  in  viii  37  2-6,  and  is  a 
developement  of  Satobrhati.  The  verse  of  four  syllables  always  consists 
of  an  unaccented  word. 

71.  Type  12.  8.  8  |  12.8.8.  A  variation  of  the  last  No.,  found  in 
viii  37  1. 

72.  Type  12.8  |  12.8  |  12.8.  This  is  an  extension  of  Sato- 
brhati, not  recognized  in  the  text,  but  found  in  the  stanzas  vii  32  2-3, 
viii  19  26-27,  ix  107  2-3,  15-16.     Cf.  No.  4,  and  see  §  246. 

73.  Type  12. 12  |  8.8.8.8.  This  stanza  is  found  in  viii  36  1-6  : 
see  §  247  iv. 

74.  Type  12.12.8  |  12.12.8.  This  stanza  belongs  to  the  Atyasti 
group  :  it  is  found  in  i  135  7,  8.     See  §  247  ii. 

75.  Type  12. 12. 8|  12.12.12.  This  stanza  also  belongs  to  the 
Atyasti  group  :  it  is  found  in  iv  1  1. 


Long  stanzas  249 

F.    Stanzas  of  seven  verses. 

76.  Type  8.8.8|8.8.8.8.  This  extension  of  the  Mahapankti 
stanza  is  found  in  viii  40  2,  x  133  1—3.  The  grouping  of  the  verses 
varies. 

77.  Type  8  .  8  .  8  |  8 .  8  |  12  .  8.  This  is  the  metre  of  i  137,  see 
§  247  ii.  Like  all  the  metres  that  now  remain,  it  belongs  to  the 
Atyasti  group. 

78.  Type  8  .  12  .  8  j  12  .  8  .  12  .  8.  This  combination  of  a  Kakubh 
and  a  SatobrhatI  stanza  was  perhaps  regarded  as  a  single  stanza  in  the 
strophic  period.     For  the  occurrences  see  §  246  i. 

79.  Type  12.4  |  12.4  J  12.8.8:  Asti.  Found  in  ii  22  2,  3.  See 
§  247  iii. 

80.  Type  12  .  8 .  8  |  8  .  8  |  12  .  8.     Found  in  i  129  9  :  see  §  247  ii. 

81.  Type  12.  12  .  8  |  8.8  |  8.8.     Found  in  i  129  8  :  see  §  247  ii. 

82.  Type  12  .  12  .  8  |  8  .  8  |  12  .  8  :  Atyasti.  This  elaborate  stanza 
is  found  generally  in  the  hymns  i  127-139,  though  with  many  slight 
variations,  and  belongs  to  the  end  of  the  archaic  period  or  to  the 
strophic  period.     See  §  247. 

83.  Type  12.12.8  |  12  .  8  |  12  .  8  :  Dhrti.     Found  in  iv  1  3. 

84.  Type  12  .  12  .  12  .  4  |  12 .  8  .  4.  This  appears  to  be  the  type 
aimed  at  in  ii  22  4.     See  §  247  iii. 

85.  Type  13  .  12  .  8  |  8  .  8  |  14  .  8.  This  stanza  is  found  in  i  133  6, 
and  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  text  requires  correction  :  cf.  No.  50. 

G.     Stanzas  of  eight  verses. 

86.  Type  8.8.12.8  |  12.8.12.8.  This  combination  of  a  BrhatI 
and  a  SatobrhatI  stanza  was  very  possibly  regarded  as  forming  a  single 
stanza  :  for  the  occurrences  see  §  246  ii  iii. 

87.  Type  12 .  4  |  12.  4  |  12 .  4  |  8 .  8.  Found  in  ii  22  1:  see 
§  247  iii. 

88.  Type  12  .  12  .  8  |  8 .  8  |  12 .  8 .  8  :  Atidhrti.  This  stanza  of  76 
syllables  is  the  longest  recognized  in  the  Rigveda.  It  is  an  extension 
of  No.  82,  and  occurs  in  i  127  6  :  see  §  247  ii. 


CHAPTER   X. 

GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS. 

254.  In  the  first  three  chapters  of  this  book  a  general  survey 
was  made  of  the  metre,  language,  and  subject-matter  of  the  hymns 
of  the  Rigveda,  with  the  object  of  finding  a  basis  for  the  more 
exact  metrical  investigations  which  were  to  follow.  As  a  result  of 
this  survey  the  hymns  were  rearranged,  and  the  division  into  ten 
Mandalas  was  replaced  by  a  division  into  ten  '  groups,'  each  group 
being  based  upon  one  or  more  of  the  collections  found  in  the 
Sariihita  text,  but  being  modified  by  the  detachment  and  attach- 
ment of  individual  hymns :  and  the  ten  groups  were  arranged  in 
a  rough  chronological  order,  in  accordance  with  their  general 
correspondence  to  the  respective  types  of  the  '  bardic,'  '  normal,' 
'  cretic,'  and  '  popular '  periods. 

But  in  the  six  chapters  which  have  followed,  of  which  three 
have  been  occupied  with  the  establishment  of  a  metrically  correct 
text,  and  three  with  the  ascertainment  of  the  laws  of  metre,  we 
have  met  with  a  mass  of  evidence  which  has  a  considerable  bearing 
upon  the  grouping  of  the  hymns,  and  which  does  not  in  every 
particular  support  the  rearrangement  which  was  adopted  as  a 
basis. 

Thus  a  revision  of  the  grouping  becomes  necessary,  and  in  this 
concluding  chapter  the  endeavour  will  be  made  first  to  revise  the 
grouping  in  harmony  with  all  the  evidence  now  before  us,  then  to 
restate  the  principal  elements  of  the  evidence  in  agreement  with 
the  revised  grouping,  and  lastly  to  trace  in  general  outline  the 
developeinent  of  the  metre,  language,  and  subject-matter  in  such 
a  way  as  may  seem  most  helpful  to  those  who  in  the  future  may  be 
concerned  with  the  investigation  of  any  one  of  them. 

The  historical  study  of  the  hymns  by  means  of  internal  evidence  is 
only  possible  by  the  process  of  successive  approximations,  each  of  which 
reacts    upon    the  evidence  by  which  it  was   obtained.      The   earliest 


The  Table  of  hymns  251 

attempts  made  in  this  direction  broke  down  because  their  authors  took 
as  their  units  complete  Mandalas,  as  H.  Brunnhofer  in  KZ.  xxv  Wl(3  t\\ 
(1879),  and  C.  R.  Lanman  in  his  Noun-Inflection  in  the  Veda,  JAOS.  x 
pp.  576-581  (1878).  The  latter  writer  has  however  correctly  stated, 
in  my  opinion,  the  method  by  which  progress  is  possible,  and  in  the 
present  work  and  the  papers  which  have  preceded  it  I  have  done  no 
more  than  attempt  to  carry  out  Lanman's  programme,  as  stated  on 
p.  581  of  the  work  referred  to. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  process  of  repeated  correction  is  not  only 
laborious  for  the  investigator  but  also  for  the  reader,  who  may  further 
be  inclined  to  dismiss  as  artificial  arguments  which  involve  a  mass  of 
detail  which  is  constantly  changing  and  presents  no  clear  picture  to  the 
mind.  These  difficulties  attend  the  first  investigations  of  any  intricate 
problem  :  but  as  soon  as  a  beginning  has  been  made,  they  diminish 
rapidly  in  seriousness.  Thus  as  soon  as  the  general  difference  between 
the  Rigveda  proper  and  the  popular  Rigveda  is  recognised,  the  student 
will  be  prepared  for  the  further  distinctions  made  at  the  opening  of  this 
book,  whilst  the  further  corrections  made  in  this  chapter,  though  not 
unimportant  in  themselves,  scarcely  affect  in  any  important  particulars 
the  arguments  of  the  preceding  chapters. 


255.  The  revised  grouping  of  the  hymns  which  is  now 
proposed  is  indicated  in  the  '  Table  of  hymns '  which  is  appended 
to  this  chapter.  The  periods  to  which  the  respective  hymns  are 
referred  are  five  in  number,  the  '  bardic  period '  of  Chapters  i-in 
having  been  replaced  since  by  the  '  archaic '  and  '  strophic '  periods. 
The  difference  in  character  between  these  two  periods  is  perhaps 
most  marked  in  the  use  of  hiatus  (§  131),  but  it  is  very  clear  in 
every  part  of  our  subject,  that  is,  in  syllabic  restoration  (§  153),  in 
quantitative  change  (§  180),  in  dimeter  rhythm  (§  195)  and  in 
trimeter  rhythm  (§  235).  This  difference,  therefore,  though  it  may 
pass  unnoticed  in  a  first  review  of  the  Rigveda,  becomes  on  closer 
examination  the  plainest  of  all.  The  period  to  which  a  particular 
hymn  is  assigned  is  shewn  by  a  capital  letter  in  the  left-hand 
column,  the  popular  Rigveda  being  denoted  as  before  by  the 
asterisk. 

Following  the  practice  of  the  native  Anukramani's,  the  Table 
states  the  '  metre '  of  each  hymn  and  the  '  deity '  to  which  it  is 
addressed.  Uneven  lyric,  Trochaic  Gayatri,  Contaminated  Tristubh, 
and  Epic  Anustubh  are  recognised  as  distinct  metres,  but  many 
trifling  variations  (such  as  occasional  extra  verses  in  Gayatri  or 
Tristubh  hymns)  are  not  noticed.  Poems  which  are  not  of  the 
nature  of  hymns  have  no  entry  in  the  column  for  the  ' deity,'  except 
that  the  words  'cosmogony'  or  'charm'  appear  where  the  poem  has 


252  Metrical  pictures 

either  of  these  characters.  It  thus  appears  at  a  glance  that  poems 
which  are  not  hymns  are  found  almost  exclusively  in  the  popular 
period. 

The  metrical  statistics  are  arranged  in  six  columns,  of  which 
the  first  three  state  the  number  of  '  early  metrical  notes,'  that  is, 
of  those  variations  which  are  chiefly  found  in  the  archaic  and 
strophic  periods,  and  the  last  three  the  number  of  'late'  notes, 
that  is,  of  those  variations  which  are  chiefly  found  in  the  cretic 
and  popular  periods.  The  nature  of  these  variations  is  more  fully 
explained  in  §§  258-260.  In  the  case  of  each  hymn  or  small  group 
of  hymns  the  statistics  as  a  whole  combine  to  form  what  we  may 
call  a  metrical  'picture,  that  is,  a  numerical  formula  by  which  the 
general  tenour  of  the  metrical  evidence  is  indicated.  Thus  since 
all  variations  are  comparatively  rare  in  the  normal  period,  and  such 
as  occur  are  evenly  distributed  between  those  that  mark  the  earlier 
and  the  later  periods,  hymns  of  this  period  may  generally  be 
recognised  by  the  small  total  number  of  variations  (on  the  average 
about  one  in  every  four  trimeter  verses)  and  by  an  approach  towards 
equality  in  the  number  of  early  and  late  variations.  The  normal 
period  thus  becomes  the  central  point  in  our  investigations,  and  a 
hymn  or  group  of  hymns  will  be  judged  to  be  either  earlier  or  later 
according  to  the  extent  to  which  the  metrical  picture  deviates  from 
the  standard  thus  laid  down:  the  archaic  hymns  being  most  plainly 
marked  by  having  a  very  large  number  of  variations,  that  is,  about 
one  in  every  two  trimeter  verses,  half  of  these  being  in  the  first 
column  alone.  Hymns  in  dimeter  verse,  however,  cannot  be  so 
readily  distinguished  by  their  metrical  pictures,  as  the  number  of 
variations  is  much  smaller. 

Lastly,  in  the  two  right-hand  columns  is  given  the  number  of 
occurrences  of  early  and  late  '  linguistic  variations/  including  both 
grammatical  forms  and  wTords,  according  to  the  lists  given  in 
Appendix  I.  This  linguistic  evidence,  being  mainly  directed  to 
the  difference  between  the  Rigveda  proper  and  the  popular  Rigveda, 
has  only  an  indirect  bearing  upon  the  different  periods  of  the  former. 
But  when  applied  to  large  groups  of  hymns,  this  indirect  evidence 
is  of  great  value,  because  it  is  entirely  independent  of  the  metrical 
evidence. 

The  general  harmony  between  the  metrical  and  linguistic 
evidence  appears  clearly  from  the  Table  in  §  257. 


Final  arrangement  of  the  groups  253 

The  metrical  variations  referred  to  in  §§  257,  260  and  in  the  '  Table 
of  hymns  '  include  all  those  which  have  been  shewn  in  the  preoecBng 
chapters  to  possess  historical  importance,  and  the  corrected  statistics 
shew  that  they  are  naturally  divided  into  six  groups,  as  follows : 

A.  Variations  distinctive  of  the  archaic  period. 

B.  Variations  distinctive  of  the  archaic  and  strophic  periods. 

C.  Variations  distinctive  of  the  same  periods,  but  also  in  use, 

though  to  a  smaller  extent,  in  the  normal  period. 

D.  The  cretic  break,  quite  common  in  all  periods,   but  much 

more  frequently  employed  after  the  end  of  the  strophic 
period  than  before. 

E.  Variations  distinctive  of  the  cretic  and  popular  periods. 

F.  Variations  distinctive  of  the  popular  period  only. 

Of  these  the  first  three  are  *  early  variations,'  and  the  last  three  are 
'  late  variations.'  In  dimeter  verse  only  the  first  two  and  the  last  two 
classes  are  represented,  and  the  whole  amount  of  evidence  is  much 
smaller  than  in  trimeter  verse. 

A  detailed  list  of  the  variations  is  given  in  §  260. 

256.  The  Table  in  the  following  section  shews  the  manner  in 
which  the  metrical  and  linguistic  evidence  may  be  combined  with 
regard  to  the  larger  groups  of  hymns  which  appear  there.  The 
figures  in  thick  type  apply  to  the  whole  mass  of  hymns  assigned 
to  each  of  the  five  periods,  and  give  the  average  number  of  variations 
under  each  heading  in  every  100  trimeter  or  150  dimeter  verses : 
whilst  the  figures  in  ordinary  type  give  the  same  information  with 
regard  to  the  separate  groups.  The  pictures  as  given  for  trimeter 
verse  being  the  more  significant,  there  can  be  now  little  reason  to 
doubt  that  the  groups  i  127-135  and  i  165-190  belong  in  the  main 
to  the  archaic  period,  whilst  i  74-92  cannot  well  be  earlier  than 
the  strophic  period.  The  greater  part  of  the  fourth  Mandala  is 
also  seen  to  be  probably  of  the  strophic  period.  The  trimeter 
hymns  of  Mandala  vii  shew  a  high  proportion  of  variations  under 
C,  due  to  the  frequency  of  secondary  caesura:  and  the  group 
i  116-119  shews  a  high  proportion  both  under  C  and  under  D,  the 
first  due  to  the  frequency  of  some  forms  of  secondary  caesura,  the 
latter  to  the  frequency  of  the  cretic  break.  We  must  further 
notice  that  the  average  metrical  pictures  of  the  last  three  periods 
differ  but  slightly,  and  that  therefore  the  metre  becomes  here  an 
uncertain  guide.     Lastly,  in  all  the  trimeter  groups,  the  linguistic 


254  Dimeter  groins  and  single  hymns 

evidence  very  closely  approaches  the  standard  of  the  period  to 
which  each  group  is  assigned. 

With  regard  to  dimeter  verse,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  our  work  is 
less  successful.  Epic  Anustubh  is  happily  for  our  purpose  sufficiently 
distinguished  by  its  external  form,  and  therefore  only  a  very  small 
amount  of  dimeter  verse  appears  in  the  Table  as  belonging  to  the 
cretic  and  popular  periods,  and  for  this  the  metrical  evidence  is  of 
little  value.  In  the  earlier  periods  the  grouping  is  most  successful 
with  regard  to  the  lyric  metres,  in  which  it  is  guided  by  the 
trimeter  variations.  Here  for  instance  we  see  that  the  dimeter 
verses  of  the  group  i  127-135,  just  as  its  trimeter  verses,  contain 
almost  twice  as  many  early  variations  as  those  of  the  Kanva 
lyric  hymns.  From  this  assured  starting-point  we  go  on  to  notice 
that  the  dimeter  hymns  of  the  early  part  of  Mandala  v,  and  those 
of  the  group  x  20-26,  are  undoubtedly  of  the  archaic  period,  whilst 
the  dimeter  hymns  of  the  Kanva  groups  correspond  precisely  to 
the  dimeter  verses  of  the  lyric  hymns  of  the  same  groups.  It 
seems  also  probable  that  the  section  i  24-30  belongs  to  the  strophic 
period.  In  the  other  groups  the  results  seem  fairly  consistent, 
with  the  striking  exception  of  the  Soma  Pavamana  groups  ix  1-60, 
61-67  30.  In  these  large  groups  the  metre  has  the  regularity  of 
the  normal  period,  whilst  the  language  has  the  variety  of  the 
archaic  period.  This  contradiction  is  with  our  present  knowledge 
insuperable,  but  the  metrical  evidence  seems  to  be  far  the  more 
important  of  the  two. 

Except  as  regards  the  groups  here  discussed,  the  revision  of 
the  grouping  only  affects  single  hymns  or  very  small  groups.  In 
the  list  of  hymns  previously  assigned  to  the  popular  Rigveda  no 
alteration  has  been  made,  as  very  little  new  evidence  has  been 
gathered.  In  the  Rigveda  proper,  attention  has  been  mainly 
directed  to  two  points,  the  grouping  found  in  the  Samhita  text, 
and  the  '  metrical  picture.'  Where  these  both  point  in  the  same 
direction,  any  divergent  indications  that  may  have  been  noticed 
in  Ch.  ill  are  now  usually  disregarded,  and  the  grouping  is  simplified 
accordingly.  Where  this  agreement  is  wanting,  the  metrical 
picture  has  generally  been  followed  if  it  is  well  marked :  but  if 
this  is  not  the  case,  or  if  the  group  or  hymn  is  very  short,  the 
arrangement  previously  adopted  has  been  left  unaltered,  an  italic 
letter  in  the  left-hand  column  being  used  to  indicate  that  the 
metrical  picture  by  itself  would  point  to  a  different  conclusion. 


Detailed  evidence  of  date  255 

The  following  notes  deal  with  points  of  detail  with  regard  to  the 
use  and  value  of  the  evidence  of  date  furnished  in  the  'Table  of 
hymns ' : 

(i)  The  amount  of  matter  contained  in  the  'small  groups '  of  the 
'Table  of  hymns'  varies  considerably.  Where  (as  in  the  third  and 
ninth  Mandalas)  there  are  considerable  series  of  hymns  which  are 
identical  in  their  metrical  character,  space  has  been  economized  by 
treating  each  such  series  as  a  single  group.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
single  hymn  consists  of  parts  that  are  not  homogeneous,  it  is  essential 
to  record  a  separate  '  metrical  picture '  for  each  part,  however  small  it 
may  be. 

(ii)  In  tracing  the  history  of  single  variations  we  have  often 
needed  to  collect  the  occurrences  from  1000  verses  at  one  time,  and 
sometimes  from  as  many  as  5000.  But  when  the  most  important 
variations  are  combined,  the  history  can  be  traced  with  equal  certainty 
from  comparatively  small  bodies  of  verse.  Supposing  that  10  variations 
have  exactly  the  same  history,  we  can  trace  this  with  the  same  accuracy 
either  by  observing  a  single  variation  in  1 000  verses,  or  all  together  in 
100  verses.  In  fact  the  archaic  variations  are  so  numerous  that  we 
have  little  difficulty  in  recognising  a  hymn  of  archaic  type  by  its  metre, 
even  if  it  only  includes  from  25  to  50  verses  :  but  in  the  other  periods 
the  evidence  is  less  direct,  and  cannot  be  very  clearly  followed  unless 
we  can  first  group  on  some  other  ground  hymns  containing  together 
from  100  to  200  verses.  The  extreme  shortness  and  fewness  of  the 
dimeter  hymns  in  the  family  books  greatly  hamper  the  application  of 
the  metrical  evidence,  and  we  can  therefore  do  little  more  than  assume 
that  in  each  Mandala  the  dimeter  hymns  are  probably  of  the  same 
date  as  those  in  trimeter  verse. 

(iii)  The  variations  of  which  the  occurrences  are  counted  up  in 
the  six  columns  are  those  which  are  shewn  in  the  Table  in  §  260,  and 
include  all  those  which  have  been  shewn  in  the  previous  chapters  to 
possess  historical  importance.  The  evidential  value  of  the  separate 
variations  included  in  one  column  is  approximately  the  same,  as  appears 
from  the  corrected  statistics  as  given  in  that  Table.  But  the  different 
columns  are  by  no  means  of  equal  value  as  evidence  ;  column  A  which 
represents  the  'archaic'  variations  has  by  far  the  most  distinctive 
character,  and  column  D  which  gives  the  occurrences  of  the  '  cretic 
break '  is  the  least  important. 

(iv)  It  must  be  noticed  that  the  numbers  given  in  the  'Table  of 
hymns '  are  absolute,  and  not  proportionate  :  whilst  those  in  the  Table 
in  the  next  section  are  proportionate  to  each  100  verses,  three  dimeter 
verses  being  counted  as  two.  The  pictures  in  the  'Table  of  hymns' 
must  therefore  be  reduced  to  the  same  proportions  before  they  are 
compared  with  the  standard  pictures  for  each  period. 


256 


Combined  pictures 


257.    Combined  Metrical  and  Linguistic  Pictures. 


No. 

Group 

Tr. 
w. 

Dim. 
w. 

Notes  in  trimeter  verses 

• 

Notes  in 
dimeter  vv. 

Lingu. 

A 

B    C 

D  E  F 

A    B    E  F 

V    AV 

Archaic 

4499 

4368 

21 

6  13 

7  2  1 

12   16   2  0 

68     4 

1 

i 58-64 

201 

24 

3     4 

5  10 

81     4 

2 

127-135 

211 

275 

22 

6  13 

8  3  0 

14  14  1  1 

72     3 

3 

165-190 

671 

85 

18 

4  11 

7  2  2 

62    6 

4 

v  (Atri) 

361 

963 

20 

8  11 

7  10 

13  20  1  1 

67    4 

5 

vi 

1600 

510 

17 

5  11 

8  11 

8  11  2  0 

66     4 

6 

viii  12-31 

316 

867 

23 

11  18 

8  3  1 

8  12  2  0 

63     4 

7 

60  etc.  (lyric) 

185 

454 

17 

8  10 

4  3  1 

13  16  1  0 

64    5 

8 

„  (dimeter) 

2 

500 

10  13  2  0 

52     4 

9 

ix  98-111 

64 

311 

8    9  2  1 

80    4 

10 

x  20-26 

45 

167 

13  18  1  0 

106     3 

Strophic 

4458 

3928 

7 

6  14 

7  11 

5  10  2  1 

55     4 

11 

i  24,  etc. 

162 

6  17  1  0 

56    5 

12 

Kanva  (lyric)1 

311 

577 

8 

10    8 

11  2  0 

5  10  2  1 

57    4 

13 

„       (dimeter) l 

31 

753 

3  13  3  2 

57     4 

14 

i 74-92 

288 

372 

9 

4  11 

9  2  1 

4     6  11 

49     7 

15 

141-158 

326 

10 

9 

6  13 

6  3  1 

58    4 

16 

iv 

1115 

350 

9 

3    9 

7  11 

4  13  1  0 

62     3 

17 

vii  (lyric) 

107 

166 

11 

4  13 

7  3  0 

8  16  3  1 

63     3 

18 

„   (trimeter) 

1669 

109 

7 

8  19 

7  1  1 

6  18  0  0 

53     4 

19 

viii  62-97 

140 

539 

3 

3     9 

6  1  1 

6    8  10 

52     5 

Normal 

5815 

3257 

2 

2     8 

11  2  1 

2     5  3  1 

51     5 

20 

i  1-11 

287 

3     9  11 

62     7 

21 

12-23 

357 

0     6  3  0 

32     3 

22 

116-119 

284 

2 

2  20 

16  5  3 

45  10 

23 

ii 

1011 

116 

4 

2     7 

11  2  1 

42     7 

24 

iii 

1456 

415 

2 

2     9 

13  2  0 

5     6  2  1 

44     5 

25 

iv 

512 

74 

3 

3     6 

13  1  0 

38     4 

26 

V 

894 

85 

2 

1     7 

9  1  1 

39     5 

27 

ix  1-60 

1 

1169 

2     3  3  1 

79     3 

28 

61-67 

3 

599 

2     2  4  0 

82     2 

29 

68-97 

972 

3 

2     5 

8  11 

57    5 

Cretic 

4942 

618 

2 

1     4 

14  4  1 

3     5  2  1 

36     8 

30 

i  31-35 

284 

2 

1     3 

10  2  2 

27  14 

31 

94-115 

682 

2 

3     5 

17  4  1 

35     9 

32 

vi 

415 

155 

3 

1     3 

14  1  3 

2     5  10 

42     8 

33 

vii 

515 

75 

3 

1     5 

16  2  1 

39     6 

34 

x  29-80 

1125 

43 

3 

1     5 

15  5  0 

32     8 

Popular 

3463 

343 

3 

1     4 

12  3  7 

6     8  4  2 

10   38 

This  table  only  deals  with  hymns  composed  in  trimeter  and  in  normal  dimeter 
verse :  the  bulk  of  the  dimeter  verse  of  the  cretic  and  popular  periods  is  therefore 
not  included.  The  hymns  in  each  group  are  those  which  in  the  '  Table  of  hymns  ' 
are  assigned  to  *he  period  named. 

All  the  figures  (except  those  shewing  the  number  of  verses)  are  proportional  to 
100  trimeter  or  150  dimeter  verses. 

1  i.e.  hymns  in  the  groups  i  36-43,  44-50,  viii  1-11,  32-34,  49-57. 


Metrical  developement  257 

258.  The  developement  of  metre  may  be  traced  with  regard 
either  to  the  '  external '  or  the  '  internal '  form  (§§  30,  31). 
External  metrical  form  is  one  of  the  most  important  criteria  of 
the  popular  Rigveda,  but  with  regard  to  it  there  is  little  to  be 
amended  in  the  statements  of  the  earlier  chapters.  We  notice 
however  that  '  contamination '  is  also  a  mark  of  the  archaic  period 
(§  223).  In  the  Rigveda  proper  '  decasyllabic  Tristubh '  is  found 
to  be  a  mark  of  the  archaic  or  of  the  strophic  period,  according  to 
the  rhythm  (§  225),  whilst  Pentad  hymns  are  found  as  late  as 
the  normal  period.  Lyric  metres  generally  characterise  the  archaic 
period:  but  the  regular  Brhati-Satobrhati  strophe  is  later.  The 
date  of  the  Trochaic  Gayatri  metre  is  not  satisfactorily  determined. 

The  developement  of  the  internal  form,  that  is,  of  the  less 
striking  variations,  can  only  be  followed  systematically  so  far  as 
we  find  general  types  consistently  followed.  For  this  purpose, 
therefore,  we  put  aside  all  hymns  of  special  types,  such  as  the 
decasyllabic  hymns,  and  those  in  Trochaic  Gayatri  and  in  Epic 
Anustubh,  and  also  the  Anustubh  hymns  of  the  Kanvas  and  of  the 
cretic  period,  which  approach  the  type  of  Epic  Anustubh  (§  200). 
The  history  of  trimeter  verse  and  (less  clearly)  of  normal  dimeter 
verse  can  then  be  followed  by  the  aid  of  the  Table  in  §  260. 

The  '  early  variations '  included  in  the  Table  are  26  in  number, 
of  which  one  has  to  do  with  the  external  form,  and  7  are  connected 
with  the  restoration  of  the  text,  and  are  discussed  in  the  next 
section.  Of  the  remaining  18  variations  there  are  7  which  are 
almost  restricted  to  the  archaic  period,  7  which  are  common  to 
the  archaic  and  strophic  periods,  and  only  4  which  retain  some 
importance  in  the  normal  period.  Of  the  later  variations  almost 
all  have  to  do  either  with  the  text  or  with  the  external  form :  so 
that  we  may  say  that  at  the  end  of  the  normal  period  the  internal 
form  is  fixed,  both  for  trimeter  and  dimeter  verse :  the  only 
exception  being  the  increased  use  of  the  cretic  break. 

259.  The  linguistic  developement  of  the  Rigveda  runs  parallel 
with  that  of  the  metre.  This  is  to  be  seen  first  of  all  in  the  use 
of  Sandhi  and  the  linguistic  forms  which  are  reached  by  metrical 
restoration.  The  general  explanation  of  these  changes  is  the 
increasing  rapidity  of  pronunciation,  which  results  in  the  extended 
use  of  Sandhi  combination,  the  consonantization  of  semi-vowels, 
and  the  shortening  of  vowels  originally  long :  although  there  are 

a.  17 


258  Linguistic  developement 

a  few  instances  of  change  in  the  opposite  direction,  which  are 
explained  by  the  influence  of  analogy.  The  Table  in  §  260  shews 
that  those  variations  which  are  becoming  rare  in  the  archaic  period 
die  out  rapidly,  and  generally  reach  their  minimum  in  the  normal 
period :  but  the  linguistic  developement  can  be  traced  in  the  later 
periods  by  the  rise  of  new  variations  which  are  due  to  the  same 
general  causes  as  the  decay  of  the  others. 

The  same  progress  can  be  traced  in  the  use  of  the  linguistic 
features  which  characterise  the  Rigveda  proper  as  contrasted  with 
the  late  Rigveda  and  Atharvaveda.  As  appears  from  the  Table 
in  §  257,  the  older  forms  and  words  are  much  more  common  in  the 
archaic  period  than  elsewhere,  and  are  more  common  in  the  strophic 
and  normal  periods  than  in  the  cretic  hymns :  that  is,  of  the  whole 
number  of  these  words  and  forms  there  are  some  that  go  out  of 
use  at  the  end  of  each  period  in  succession.  As  to  the  later  forms, 
none  of  them  are  in  regular  use  in  any  part  of  the  Rigveda  proper, 
but  they  are  used  in  the  cretic  period  twice  as  often  as  in  those 
periods  which  precede  it. 

Very  much  fuller  evidence  would  be  available  if  we  were  to 
take  as  a  starting  point  the  linguistic  features  of  the  normal  period, 
and  contrast  them  with  those  that  mark  the  two  earlier  periods. 
This  line  of  evidence  has  been  pursued,  so  far  as  grammatical  forms 
are  concerned,  in  the  author's  Historical  Vedic  Grammar.  It  is 
sufficient  here  to  note  that  the  linguistic  features  of  the  archaic 
period  differ  from  those  of  the  normal  period  somewhat  in  the  same 
way,  though  not  to  the  same  extent,  as  the  dialect  of  the  Homeric 
poems  differs  from  that  of  Herodotus. 


Notes  to  the  Table  on  the  page  opposite. 

All  the  figures  in  the  body  of  the  table  are  proportional  to  each  1000  trimeter 
verses,  or  to  each  1500  dimeter  verses :  and  the  assignment  of  the  occurrences  to 
the  respective  groups  is  in  accordance  with  the  arrangement  adopted  in  the  '  Table 
of  hymns.' 

1  including  hiatus  after  -a  when  shortened  (§  172  i),  and  after  duals  in  -a,  -i, 
etc.  when  shortened  (§  174  i).  3  also  §§  143  ii,  hi,  151  i.  3  except  -nam  in 

dimeter  cadence.  4  as  in  -saham,  -manam,  -vanam,  -anam  when  restored  on 

metrical  grounds.  5  also  §  220  iii-vi.  6  Catalectic  and  heptasyllabic  dimeter 
verses.  7  except  when  accompanied  by  secondary  caesura.  8  Viratsthana  and 
indra  verses,  and  verses  with  double  rest.  9  also  §§  166  iv,  170  i.  10  i.e.  when 
accompanied  by  caesura  after  the  third  syllable,  or  by  the  break  |[  ~  -  «- :  for  the 
other  forms  see  below.  n  also  §§  128,  129.  u  with  consonantal  value  of  y 

in  each  case.  Vi  This  variation  is  not  taken  into  account  except  in  the  treat- 

ment of  dimeter  verse.  14  Combination  by  Sandhi  of  final  -t,  -i,  -u,  -ii  with 

dissimilar  vowels.  15  with  the  final  vowel  in  each  case  shortened. 


Table  of  variations  259 

260.    Table  of  Variations  of  historical  importance. 


Refer  to  § 

Variation 

In  trimeter 

verses 

In  no 
Ar. 

rmal  dimeter  vv. 

Period 

Ar. 

St. 

N. 

Cr. 

Pop. 

St.     N.    Cr.     P. 

Whole  no.  of  verses 

4499 

4458 

5815 

4942 

3463 

4368  3928  3257  618  343 

A.    Archaic 

121AC1 

Hiatus  after  -ii1 

22 

9 

2 

2 

5 

30 

12    7   -     8 

142  a 

Resolutions  -aa,  -aam* 

40 

13 

3 

3 

5 

43 

15     7  12  15 

170  ii&amp;c 

Shortened  stems  of  nouns4 

2 

11--. 

190  v  3 

Irregular  cadence 

16 

6 

2 

2 

3 

21 

14    5  15  26 

191  i,  ii 

Short  dimeter  verses6 

20 

5     4     2    8 

214  i,  ii 

Weak  caesura7 

17 

8 

4 

2 

2 

218  i 

Break  || &gt;7 

16 

8 

2 

2 

1 

218  vii 

Irregular  breaks  (late  caes.) 
Short  tenth  syllable 

11 

4 

3 

3 

2 

220  ii 

34 

10 

4 

5 

3 

226 

Rests,  with  iambic  rhythm8 

35 

9 

2 

2 

1 

228 

Neutral  rests 

18 

6 

2 

2 

7 

Total 

209 

73 

24 

23 

29 

116 

47  24  29  57 

B.    Archaic  and  Strophic 

123  ac 

Hiatus  after  -a    - 

6 

5 

1 

1 

1 

9 

4     10    4 

143  iii 

-aam  in  dimeter  cadence 

54 

43  14  19     4 

162  3,  49 

-hi,  u-,  -athe,  -ate 

4 

5 

1 

1 

1 

8 

7    2    2- 

190  i 

Long  fifth  syllable 

18 

10    6    9  30 

190  ii 

Short  sixth  syllable 

72 

40  23  17  42 

213  ii,  iii 

Secondary  caesura10 

15 

24 

8 

3 

3 

218  iii 

Break  -  j|  -  ~7 

14 

10 

2 

3 

2 

218  v 

Break  ||  -  -  ~ 

6 

4 

1 

1 

1 

220  i  c 

Short  eighth  not  final 

14 

9 

2 

3 

4 

227  i 

Pentad  verses 

5 

2 

1 

0 

2 

Total 

64 

59 

16 

12 

14 

161 

104  46  47  80 

C.    Other  early  variations 

121Z&gt;,  123/; 

Hiatus  -a,  -a  at  caesura 

20 

10 

5 

3 

5 

213  i 

Sec.  caes.:   VasisthI  v. 

45 

62 

37 

18 

17 

213  iv 

,,        with  break  -  ||  -  *•&gt; 

13 

14 

8 

4 

3 

218  ii 

Break  ~  ||  -— 7 

20 

27 

12 

7 

7 

220  i  ab 

Short  eighth  (final  syll.) 

31 

26 

13 

6 

10 

Total 

129 

139 

75 

38 

42 

D.     Cretic  break  (||  -  • ) 

74 

72  109  138 

121 

E.     Later  variations 

122b11 

Comb,  of  sd,  duals,  iva 

6 

6 

9 

19 

5 

3 

4    3     5    9 

136  3,1372 

„       divyd,  sakhyci,  siiryaVi 

3 

2 

5 

8 

8 

7 

7  10    2   - 

144 

Resolution  -bhidm,  -bhiah13 

[4 

1 

4 

3 

3] 

3 

5  10  14  18 

159  i,  ii 

-a,  -tha,  -ta  shortened 

1 

2 

1 

2 

3 

5 

3    4     2    9 

223  i 

Catalectic  Jagati 

5 

3 

2 

10 

9 

Total 

15 

13 

17 

39 

25 

18 

19  27  23  36 

F.     Popular  period 

125 

Comb,  of  -?',  -ii,  etc.14 

2 

2 

5 

5 

15 

3 

4    4     7  19 

135 

ij  v  consonantal 

- 

1 

1 

0 

4 

- 

_    _    _     4 

160  4,1613 

u,  yddi15 

1 

2 

1 

3 

8 

- 

2   -    -     1 

171  v,  172  i 

-a  u,  -o  before  hiatus 

1 

2 

1 

1 

4 

1 

1     1    -    - 

223  ii 

Extended  Tristubh 

2 

1 

1 

3 

36 

229 

Hybrid  verse 

2 

- 

- 

1 

6 

Total 

8 

8 

9 

13 

~n 

4 

7    5    7  24 

17—2 


2G0  Origin  of  the  ritual 

261.  As  the  parallel  developement  of  language  and  metre 
affords  adequate  proof  of  the  general  chronological  sequence  of 
the  Vedic  hymns,  it  is  unnecessary  to  trace  the  developement  of 
ideas  with  any  purpose  of  obtaining  from  this  study  a  corroboration 
of  our  theory  as  a  whole.  It  is  perhaps  peculiarly  difficult  to  trace 
such  a  developement  in  a  ritual  literature,  in  which  antiquated 
conceptions  may  easily  linger  for  long  periods  by  the  mere  force 
of  daily  repetition,  long  after  they  have  ceased  to  express  any 
genuine  feeling  or  belief.  In  giving  here  a  general  sketch  of  the 
developement  of  the  conceptions  which  form  the  subject-matter 
of  the  hymns,  we  can  only  attempt  to  point  out  that  here  and 
there  such  developement  plainly  runs  parallel  with  that  of  metre 
and  language,  and  that  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  closer 
investigation  may  lead  to  more  definite  results. 

262.  The  ritual  practices  which  are  fundamental  to  the  Rigveda 
appear  to  be  essentially  older  than  any  beliefs  in  gods,  heroes,  or 
spirits  which  may  be  adduced  from  time  to  time  in  explanation  of 
them.  The  kindling  of  the  sacred  fire  before  dawn  may  have  been 
originally  an  act  of  sympathetic  magic  calculated  to  ensure  the 
return  of  daylight,  and  therefore  as  practical  in  its  aim  as  the 
kindling  of  fire  to  be  a  source  of  light  or  warmth  in  the  house,  or 
a  means  of  warning  off  thieves  and  beasts  of  prey.  The  preparation 
of  the  sacred  drink,  originally  mead  and  in  a  later  form  Soma, 
was  an  even  more  direct  means  of  strengthening  the  clan  by  raising 
the  spirits  of  its  warriors,  and  making  welcome  the  visitor  who 
might  some  day  fight  on  his  hosts'  side.  Throughout  the  Rigveda 
the  'priests'  are  primarily  expert  craftsmen,  skilled  in  the  kindling 
of  the  fire  or  the  preparation  of  the  nectar  in  accordance  with 
ancient  rules:  a  third  attainment,  the  poetic  inspiration  which 
finds  expression  in  chant  and  recitation,  necessary  accompaniments 
of  either  of  the  primeval  ceremonies,  is  perhaps  of  later  date,  but 
reaches  almost  equal  importance. 

But  even  in  the  earliest  parts  of  the  Rigveda  we  find  each  of 
the  two  great  ceremonies  interpreted  in  a  different  way,  and  so 
that  the  one  becomes  to  a  great  extent  out  of  harmony  with  the 
other.  The  sacred  fire  is  now  kindled  to  act  as  'messenger' 
between  two  peoples,  the  one  on  the  earth  and  the  other  in  heaven. 
The  '  people  in  heaven '  is  variously  described  as  consisting  of  the 
'  gods,'  or  by  name  of  '  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,'  to  which  list  we 


Gods  of  heaven  air  and  earl  It  -jin 

may  mentally  add  'and  so  forth,'  since  the  names  given  are  plainly 
no  complete  catalogue  of  the  gods  meant.  We  have  therefore  in 
the  archaic  period  a  clear  conception  of  a  company  of  deities  living 
in  the  sky,  and  an  interpretation  of  the  sacrifice  as  a  festival  to 
which  these  gods  are  invited  by  the  fire-messenger  to  descend. 
This  circle  of  deities  we  may  provisionally  name  the  '  Chaldaean 
gods,'  since  so  far  as  our  knowledge  goes  the  study  and  admiration 
of  the  heavens  is  in  the  first  instance  associated  with  the  shepherd- 
peoples  of  the  Chaldaean  plains. 

On  the  other  hand  the  drink-ceremony  is  associated  with  a  god 
or  hero  Indra,  well  described  by  H.  Oldenberg  as  a  '  barbarian-god.' 
A  great  feeder,  swiller,  and  fighter,  he  stands  out  as  the  type  of 
the  Aryan  adventurer-prince,  rushing  to  the  invasion  of  the  lands 
of  the  'seven  rivers,'  storming  forts,  releasing  captives,  taking 
possession  of  lands  and  herds.  This  conception  seems  so  natural 
a  product  of  the  times,  that  we  are  hardly  surprised  to  find  that 
there  is  practically  no  trace  of  the  worship  of  Indra  amongst  other 
Indo-European  peoples:  and  it  is  so  predominant  in  the  earliest 
Vedic  hymns,  that  we  must  ascribe  to  the  enthusiasm  of  conquest 
embodied  in  the  praise  of  this  warrior-god  the  chief  impulse 
towards  the  creation  of  the  literature.  From  the  '  Chaldaean  gods ' 
Indra  is  cut  off  by  the  fact  that  he  dwells  on  earth,  not  in  the  sky ; 
and  again  not  less  sharply  by  the  lower  moral  tone  which  he 
represents.  At  this  period  then,  the  two  worships  seem  to  be 
separated  by  a  gulf  both  of  theory  and  of  sentiment. 

Two  other  groups  of  deities  are  prominent  in  the  earlier  parts 
of  the  Rigveda,  the  Asvina  and  the  Marutah.  Both  appear  capable 
of  naturalistic  interpretations;  the  Asvina  as  representing  some 
phenomenon  of  the  sky,  by  which  they  come  to  be  associated  with 
the  '  Chaldaean  '  deities ;  the  Marutah  as  representing  the  storm- 
clouds,  which  as  they  sweep  furiously  over  the  earth  may  be 
compared  to  or  associated  with  the  devastating  onset  of  Indra. 
In  a  subordinate  position  we  may  notice  especially  Usas  the  Dawn, 
and  Pusan  the  rustic  deity  of  the  field  path-ways.  In  these 
religious  conceptions  there  is  a  striking  lack  of  coordination,  and 
we  can  only  think  of  them  as  fragments  of  some  earlier  system  or 
systems  of  deities,  to  which  we  are  hardly  likely  to  find  the  clue 
unless  it  be  in  the  history  of  other  Indo-European  peoples.  The 
chief  deity  of  the  Indo-Europeans,  Zet&gt;9  or  Jove,  is  honoured  in 
the  Rigveda  by  no  hymn,  but  his  name  Dyaus  is  still  held  in 


262  Indra  and  Vayu 

respect,  and  at  times  he  seems  to  exercise  a  shadowy  sovereignty. 
Failing  fuller  knowledge,  we  may  reasonably  speak  of  all  the  deities 
mentioned  in  this  section  as  Indo-European,  and  we  may  largely 
interpret  this  Indo-European  system  as  a  deification  of  natural 
phenomena.  Amongst  these  phenomena,  however,  the  daily  course 
of  the  sun  occupies  a  position  of  very  subordinate  importance. 

Our  general  conception  therefore  of  the  subject-matter  of  the 
earliest  Vedic  hymns  is  that  it  is  composed  of  heterogeneous 
elements  amongst  which  the  following  stand  out  prominently, 
arranged  in  an  order  of  time  based  upon  their  relative  clearness  in 
the  minds  of  the  hymn- writers :  (i)  the  primitive  ceremonies  of 
fire-  and  drink- making ;  (ii)  the  Indo-European  nature-worships; 
(iii)  the  Chaldaean  deities  of  the  heaven ;  (iv)  the  warrior-god  of 
the  invasion  of  India. 


We  may  consider  here  in  more  detail  those  deities  who  are  most 
prominent  in  the  archaic  period. 

(i)  To  the  primary  conception  of  Indra  as  the  warrior-god  several 
others  are  attached,  which  may  have  been  originally  independent  of 
him  and  much  earlier  in  date.  Such  are  the  conceptions  of  (a)  the 
Vi-traghna,  the  slayer  of  the  dragon  who  guards  in  his  rock-cavern  the 
seven  sacred  streams  ;  (b)  the  dawn-maker,  who  with  a  blow  parts 
heaven  and  earth,  and  makes  the  light  appear;  (c)  the  storm-god,  who 
rides  at  the  head  of  his  host,  the  Marutali,  and  who  strikes  down  his 
foes  with  his  mace,  the  thunder-bolt ;  (d)  the  conqueror  of  some  miserly 
foe,  such  as  the  Panayah  or  Vala,  whose  cows  he  seizes.  These  con- 
ceptions cross  one  another  and  the  primary  conception  of  the  warrior- 
god  in  all  imaginable  directions,  and  can  therefore  only  with  difficulty 
be  disentangled. 

In  the  later  periods  of  the  Rigveda  Indra  is  brought  into  closer 
relation  with  the  other  gods,  and  the  savage  traits  of  his  character  are 
toned  down.  He  assumes  the  position  of  the  creator  and  supporter  of 
the  universe,  the  begetter  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  protector  of  the 
ceremonies.  He  is  chosen  by  the  gods  as  their  champion  in  time  of 
danger,  and  then  admitted  to  their  company.  In  the  latest  poems  his 
name  stands  always  prominent  in  the  catalogue  of  the  gods,  as  indeed 
it  does  throughout  the  Rigveda  in  the  hymns  addressed  to  the  Visve 
Devah. 

(ii)  In  the  archaic  hymns  Vayu  appears  to  be  the  charioteer  of 
Indra.  There  is  no  hint  in  the  hymns  themselves  that  this  god  repre- 
sents the  Wind :  this  later  interpretation  of  his  character  may  be 
either  a  reminiscence  or  a  guess.  In  no  case  is  Vayu  to  be  identified 
with  Vata,  for  they  appear  side  by  side  in  many  hymns  to  the  Visve 
Devah.  In  the  later  parts  of  the  Rigveda  the  place  of  Vayu  is  taken 
by  Brhaspati. 


The  Adityah  268 

(iii)  The  group  Jlitra-Varuua-Aryamav  is  \crv  commonly  111H 
with  in  the  archaic  period,  but  not  so  frequently  in  hymns  addressed  to 
this  triple  deity  as  in  Agni  hymns.  In  the  periods  next  following 
either  Aryaman  disappears  from  the  group,  or  other  names  are  added. 
In  later  times  (e.g.  RV.  ix  114  3c)  these  gods  form  part  of  a  group  of 
seven,  known  as  the  seven  Adityah,  the  sons  of  their  mother  Aditi. 
This  number  seven  we  may  perhaps  trace  back  to  the  archaic  period  by 
the  help  of  viii  28  5,  and  if  so,  a  door  is  open  for  H.  Oldenberg's 
interpretation  of  this  group  as  ultimately  based  upon  an  older  worship 
of  sun,  moon  and  five  planets  (Die  Religion  des  Veda,  p.  193). 

It  is  however  quite  impossible  to  connect  the  Vedic  deities  directly 
with  the  separate  heavenly  bodies.  The  association  of  Mitra  with  the 
sun  is  frequently  based  upon  the  parallel  with  the  Iranian  Mithra. 
But  it  finds  little  support  in  the  Rigveda,  unless  it  be  in  the  early 
Agni  hymns,  in  which  Agni_  is  often  said  to  be  '  like  Mitra.' 

The  names  of  the  seven  Adityah,  if  indeed  that  was  their  original 
number,  are  variously  given :  besides  the  three  principal  figures  we 
find  with  some  regularity  Savitar  and  Bhaga,  and  the  list  may  be 
completed  by  adding  the  feminine  names  of  Puramdhi  and  Aramati,  or 
those  of  the  male  deities  Daksa  and  Amsa. 

(iv)  The  Asvina  are  twin  deities  who  are  usually  interpreted  as 
denoting  some  phenomenon  of  the  sky.  In  the  Rigveda  they  appear 
as  twin-charioteers,  who  travel  to  the  ceremony  and  bring  with  them 
mead  :  by  their  beauty  and  their  courage  they  win  the  favour  of  the 
Sun's  daughter  ;  she  mounts  their  car  and  becomes  their  bride.  In 
the  later  parts  of  the  Rigveda  the  Asvina  are  rescuers  and  physicians, 
and  play  a  part  in  numerous  myths. 

(v)  It  seems  clear  that  the  Marutah  are  personifications  of  the 
storm-clouds,  and  the  Vedic  statement  that  they  are  sons  of  Dyaus 
(viii  20  17)  may  be  interpreted  by  us  as  meaning  that  they  are  Indo- 
European  deities.  In  the  earlier  parts  of  the  Rigveda  they  are  also 
entitled  Rudras,  but  later  a  deity  Rudra  is  evolved,  who  becomes  their 
father.  The  Marutah  are  frequently  brought  into  relation  with  Indra. 
In  the  Mana  hymns  (i  165-190)  Indra  robs  them  of  their  share  in  the 
sacrifice,  on  the  ground  that  he  has  conquered  the  Vitra,  not  they. 
In  truth  Indra  appears  to  have  stolen  his  title  of  Vrtraghna  from  some 
earlier  god  or  gods.  Later  the  Marutah  become  the  fighting-men  of 
Indra's  host,  and  it  would  seem  that  through  them  Indra  first  became 
associated  with  the  region  of  the  clouds. 

263.  The  first  Vedic  pantheon  appears  to  have  been  formed 
under  the  pressure  of  war.  The  various  cults  noted  in  the  last 
section  may  have  been  maintained  with  various  degrees  of  zeal  by 
different  Aryan  clans:  but  any  such  difference  became  small  in 
the  face  of  the  dark-skinned  natives,  who  did  not  practise  even 
the  fundamental  ceremonies ;  who  '  kindled  no  fire,  and  pressed  no 
Soma.'     In  the  pantheon  thus  formed  the  war-god  naturally  took 


204  Beginnings  of  philosophy 

the  first  place.  But  when  this  pressure  was  removed  new  forces 
political,  philosophical  and  aesthetic  began  to  assert  themselves, 
and  to  influence  the  forms  of  religious  worship.  Great  kingdoms 
were  established  in  the  New  Land,  and  their  sovereigns  and 
chancellors  prided  themselves  in  establishing  an  order  of  peace 
and  justice,  repeating  on  earth  the  everlasting  harmony  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  embracing  the  light-skinned  and  the 
dark-skinned  as  members  of  one  family.  Under  such  influences 
the  half-forgotten  lore  of  Chaldaea  was  in  part  revived,  and  under 
the  names  sometimes  of  the  pair  Mitra  and  Varuna,  sometimes  of 
a  single  deity  as  Varuna,  Savitar  or  Bhaga,  a  sovereign  power  is 
established  in  the  pantheon  itself,  possessing  a  moral  grandeur 
not  altogether  unworthy  to  be  compared  with  that  of  Ahura 
Mazda  or  Yahveh.  In  the  exuberant  life  of  a  tropical  country  the 
beginnings  of  philosophy  arose  in  questionings  as  to  the  source 
and  the  unity  of  the  manifold  vital  powers  of  the  universe,  the 
setting-out  of  its  parts  in  the  order  of  space,  and  the  existence  of 
a  '  beyond '  known  to  the  initiated  only.  Thus  the  fire-god  took 
again  a  new  character  as  the  source  of  life  in  man  and  beast,  in 
cloud  and  rock,  in  mountain  and  wood.  Some  old-world  myth  of 
a  giant  who  takes  three  steps  was  turned  to  a  picture  of  earth, 
heaven,  and  the  third  mysterious  region :  and  from  these  in  turn 
the  fancy  builds  up  three  earths,  three  heavens,  and  even  a  three- 
fold order  of  the  universe. 

But  as  the  speculative  spirit  grew,  religion  became  more  and 
more  divorced  from  practical  affairs,  and  in  the  variety  of  opinions 
the  uniformity,  and,  as  it  seemed,  the  beauty  of  the  ceremonial 
attracted  the  more  attention.  The  ceremonies  indeed,  as  we  have 
seen  reason  to  think,  were  originally  celebrated  for  severely  practical 
purposes:  but  when  the  fear  of  days  without  dawns  and  sons 
without  spirit  died  out,  they  were  continued  for  their  inherent 
charm  and  as  exercises  of  priestly  skill :  perhaps  too  because  the 
priests,  like  highly  educated  people  in  all  ages,  were  unwilling 
quod  iuvenes  didicere,  senes  perdenda  fateri.  The  worship  of  the 
fire-god  and  of  the  Soma  was  already  in  existence  in  the  archaic 
period,  but  the  deities  were  conceived  in  human  shape,  and  even 
associated  with  Indra  in  his  warlike  feats.  In  the  later  parts  of 
the  Rigveda  proper  they  are  increasingly  prominent  in  their 
ceremonial  meaning  only.  Every  stage  in  the  ritual  is  described 
with  insistent  minuteness  in  hymn  upon  hymn.     New  deities  are 


Agni  Visiiu  and  Soma  21;., 

introduced  which  are  without  meaning  except  for  their  part  in  the 
ritual,  as  Ghrta,  Gauh,  Havis,  Vac  and  above  all  the  deities  of  the 
successive  verses  of  the  Apriya  hymns. 

Again,  it  is  in  connection  with  the  ritual  of  the  fire-worship, 
that  we  may  find  an  explanation  of  the  new  importance  attached  in 
the  normal  and  cretic  periods  to  such  deities  as  Usas  and  Dyava- 
Prthivi,  which  seem  to  be  Indo-European  in  their  origin.  The 
dawn  is  the  hour  of  the  ritual,  and  the  twin  deities  of  darkness 
and  light  nurse  the  infant  flame.  The  fire  is  set  up  as  a  pillar  to 
join  heaven  and  earth,  and  at  the  same  time  to  hold  them  apart. 
These  deities  are  therefore  no  longer  nature  deities  in  the  strict 
sense,  but  are  part  of  the  equipment  of  the  ritual. 

(i)  The  worship  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  reaches  its  highest  develope- 
ment  in  the  Vasistha  hymns  to  these  deities,  which  attain  an  elevation 
of  moral  conception  which  has  often  recalled  to  their  readers  the 
Hebrew  psalms.  Of  the  worship  of  Varuna  alone  as  a  supreme  deity 
there  is  hardly  any  trace  in  the  Rigveda,  but  there  are  hymns  addressed 
to  him  in  which  he  is  appealed  to  to  release  his  worshipper  from  the 
burden  of  his  sins,  and  apparently  from  the  penalty  of  dropsy.  Several 
hymns  are  addressed  to  Savitar  singly,  two  to  Mitra,  and  one  to 
Bhaga.  Aditi,  the  mother  of  the  Adityah,  is  probably,  as  Professor 
A.  Macdonell  suggests,  an  abstraction  from  the  qualities  of  the  group. 
In  the  Vasistha  hymns  the  daily  course  of  the  sun  is  the  chief  wonder- 
deed  of  Mitra  and  Varuna :  and  from  this  time  on  the  worship  of 
Surya  has  a  growing  importance. 

(ii)  In  the  earliest  hymns  Agni  is  worshipped  as  the  messenger  of 
the  gods,  and  also  as  a  warrior-deity:  in  the  latter  capacity  he  is 
frequently  joined  with  Indra.  Even  in  these  hymns  he  bears  the  title 
Jatavedas,  indicating  that  all  living  things  are  his  household,  or  in 
other  words  that  he  is  the  source  of  all  life,  the  soul  of  the  universe. 
Agni  is  therefore  at  once  one  and  manifold :  by  the  side  of  Agni  stand 
the  Agnayah.  Thus  in  the  later  parts  of  the  Rigveda  proper  Agni 
Jatavedas  and  Agni  Vaisvanara  are  deities  distinct  from  Agni  himself, 
and  we  can  trace  the  beginnings  of  an  Agni  Dravinodas,  an  Agni 
Raksohan,  and  so  forth.  But  this  developement  is  most  marked  in 
connection  with  the  ritual,  with  the  result  that  Agni  is  discerned  not 
merely  in  the  sacrificial  fire  (Agni  Samiddha),  but  in  the  persons  of  the 
worshippers  (Agni  Tanu-napat),  in  those  of  the  singers  (Agni  Nara- 
mrnsa),  in  the  straw-carpet,  in  the  doorways,  in  the  sacrificial  post,  and 
in  the  solemn  concluding  cry  of  svahd,  according  to  the  set  type  of  the 
Apriya  hymns. 

(iii)  That  Visnu  represents  the  marking  out  of  the  bounds  of  space 
is  the  view  of  H.  Oldenberg  (Die  Religion  des  Veda,  p.  228). 

(iv)  Perhaps  to  all  previous  writers  on  Vedic  chronology,  certainly 
to   the   present  author   in   his   earlier   papers,    the    hymns   to   Soma 


266  Lesser  deities 

Paramenia  have  appeared  to  be  amongst  the  oldest  in  the  Rigveda. 
For  this  view  there  is  the  obvious  argument  that  both  in  language  and 
sentiment  these  hymns  are  entirely  cut  off  from  the  later  parts  of  the 
Rigveda  and  all  later  literature.  The  metre,  however,  goes  to  shew 
that  only  a  few  of  these  hymns  can  belong  to  the  two  earliest  periods 
of  the  Rigveda  :  and  it  therefore  seems  likely  that  the  number  of  these 
hymns  has  been  artificially  increased  so  that  they  may  equal  those 
addressed  to  Agni  and  Indra.  The  hymns  are  purely  of  a  ritual 
character:  only  in  the  popular  Rigveda  (ix  113)  do  we  find  the 
doctrine  of  immortality  associated  with  the  worship  of  Soma,  as  in 
Greece  with  that  of  Dionysus. 

(v)  The  deity  of  the  sacred  song  is  properly  Brhaspati  or  Brah- 
ma/mspati,  and  in  hymns  of  the  two  earlier  periods  this  character  is 
strictly  preserved.  In  later  hymns  the  god  becomes  associated  with 
Indra,  and  takes  the  place  left  vacant  by  the  disappearance  of  Vayu, 
as  Indra's  charioteer.  As  god  of  song  he  appears  to  be  replaced  in 
turn  by   Vac. 

(vi)  The  close  association  of  the  pairs  Night  and  Day,  Earth  and 
Heaven  with  the  ritual  can  readily  be  traced  in  the  Apriya  hymns.  In 
separate  hymns  Usas  alone  takes  the  place  which  is  filled  by  the  pair 
Usasa-nakta  in  the  hymns  to  the  Visve  Devah.  The  hymns  to  Usas  in 
their  feeling  for  brightness  and  beauty  recall  to  us  the  Greek  Eos  and 
the  Latin  Aurora,  and  perhaps  are  our  best  representations  of  the 
Indo-European  type  of  hymn.  So  Dyava-Prthivl  appear  occasionally 
in  Indo-European  fashion  as  parents  of  the  gods,  but  more  usually  they 
are  merely  guardians  of  the  sacred  rite,  and  obedient  subjects  of  the 
law  of  Mitra  and  Varuna. 

(vii)  Amongst  the  deities  which  are  prominent  in  the  later  parts 
of  the  Rigveda  are  the  Rbhavah  :  they  are  craftsmen  who  by  their 
skill  have  attained  the  rank  of  gods. 

264.  It  hardly  falls  within  the  scope  of  this  book  to  discuss 
in  any  detail  the  subject-matter  of  the  popular  Rigveda,  which 
opens  a  world  of  thought  entirely  different  to  that  of  the  Rigveda 
proper,  and  records  for  us  the  first  distinctively  Indian  efforts  to 
lay  the  foundations  of  philosophy,  cosmology,  and  magic.  But  a 
few  concluding  words  may  be  devoted  to  those  myths  of  which  a 
considerable  number  are  to  be  found  in  the  popular  Rigveda,  and 
which  appear  to  constitute  its  earliest  part :  since  in  the  mythical 
hymns  the  linguistic  forms  of  the  Rigveda  proper  and  the  popular 
Rigveda  are  used  side  by  side.  The  Rigveda  proper  is  not 
altogether  deficient  in  myths,  but  they  are  baldly  related  and 
generally  in  single  stanzas ;  as  for  instance  the  warlike  deeds  of 
Indra  and  the  clever  rescues  of  the  Asvina.  But  in  the  popular 
Rigveda  myths  appear  in  a  dramatic  form,  and  the  theme  is  not 


Vedic  myths  207 

historical  but  social :  here  too  the  poets  for  the  first  time  wrestle 
with  the  moral  and  aesthetic  problems  associated  with  the  relation- 
ship of  man  to  woman.  In  these  myths  the  woman  generally 
appears  as  the  temptress,  not  perhaps  so  much  from  a  sensual 
impulse  as  from  the  desire  of  children  :  whilst  the  duty  of  the  man 
is  always  abstinence,  without  any  regard  even  to  the  claims  of 
marriage.  We  find  in  fact  the  germ  of  the  ascetic  theories  which 
afterwards  became  so  firmly  rooted  both  in  Brahmanism  and  in 
Buddhism,  and  which  have  spread  thence  over  the  Western  world. 
Such  theories  stand  in  striking  contrast  to  the  patriarchal  sentiments 
of  the  Rigveda  proper  and  of  all  other  national  religions,  and  the 
question  of  their  origin  seems  to  call  for  investigation.  One 
suggestion  may  be  made  here  by  the  way.  It  seems  probable 
enough  that  Aryan  princes  may  often  have  been  led  by  native 
wives  away  from  the  practices  of  the  Brahmanic  religion,  and  in 
particular  from  liberality  to  the  Brahmans  themselves :  and  thus 
that  an  opposition  of  interests  between  priests  and  queens  may 
have  become  traditional. 

(i)  The  best  known  of  the  dramatic  myths  of  the  Rigveda  is  the 
dialogue  of  Pururavas  and  Urvasi  (RV.  x  95)  on  the  interpretation  of 
which  much  light  has  been  thrown  by  Professor  Karl  Geldner  ( Vedische 
Studien  i,  pp.  243-295).  The  poem  is  of  special  interest  to  the  folk- 
lorist,  being  based  upon  the  marriage  of  a  prince  to  a  fairy  maiden, 
and  his  subsequent  desertion  by  her.  Special  attention  may  be  called 
to  the  cynical  reply  of  Urvasi  in  stanza  15,  when  Pururavas  threatens 
to  die  for  love  of  her.  There  is  no  truth  in  the  friendship  of  women  : 
they  have  the  hearts  of  hyaenas.  However  dramatically  the  sneer  may 
suit  the  occasion  in  the  mouth  of  Urvasi,  it  reveals  a  bitter  grudge  in 
some  poet's  mind  against  feminine  influence. 

(ii)  The  tale  of  Agastya  and  his  neglected  wife  Lopamudra  (i  179) 
has  been  lately  treated  by  Dr  Emil  Sieg  (Die  Sagenstqffe  des  Rgveda, 
pp.  120-126).  Agastya  as  a  sage  is  bound  by  a  vow  of  chastity: 
Lopamudra's  youth  is  passing,  yet  she  remains  childless.  To  her 
passionate  appeals  Agastya  gives  way.  So  far  the  poet  has  only  blame 
for  the  woman.  But  in  the  concluding  stanzas  excuses  are  found  for 
the  pair.  The  divine  Soma  may  well  forgive  the  sin,  for  desire  is 
human  :  besides  Agastya  has  won  offspring,  to  the  advantage  of  both 
the  light  and  the  dark  races  (Lopamudra,  we  may  conclude,  is  a  native 
woman)  and  the  high  purposes  of  the  gods  are  after  all  fulfilled. 

(iii)  In  the  light  thrown  by  these  two  hymns  we  may  consider 
the  tale  of  Yama  and  Yami,  the  parents  of  the  human  race  (x  10). 
At  the  first  glance  it  becomes  probable  that  we  have  a  variant  of  the 
tale  of  Adam  and  Eve,  though  it  may  not  be  easy  to  guess  from  what 
common  source  or  by  what  channels  the  tale  has  reached  us  in  such 


268  Our  first  parents 

different  forms.  The  Vedic  myth  has  the  advantage  of  logical  con- 
sistency, for  the  temptation  deals  not  with  the  apparently  meaningless 
prohibition  of  eating  from  a  particular  tree,  but  with  the  real  moral 
problem  necessarily  implied  in  the  relationship  of  the  first  human  pair, 
if  they  are  conceived  (and  it  cannot  easily  be  otherwise),  both  as 
brother  and  sister  and  as  husband  and  wife.  The  Hebrew  version  may 
however  have  in  reality  the  same  meaning  as  the  Vedic:  at  any  rate 
the  phrase  "  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  "  well  represents  the  late 
Vedic  conception  of  the  marriage  relation,  and  the  shame  which  over- 
comes Adam  and  Eve  after  their  sin,  as  well  as  the  penalty  inflicted  on 
the  latter,  both  point  to  the  real  nature  of  the  sin  itself.  In  the  Rigveda 
however  the  position  is  plainly  stated.  Yarn!  is  full  of  a  longing  to 
fulfil  her  destiny,  and  to  become  the  mother  of  mankind.  Yama  on 
the  other  hand  is  overwhelmed  by  scruples :  the  laws  of  the  gods 
permit  no  exceptions,  and  their  eyes  are  open  wide  to  mark  offence. 
1  Nay,  but  the  gods  designed  us  for  wedlock,'  Yami  suggests.  '  Who 
knows  their  secret  intent,  or  will  venture  to  be  their  spokesman?' 
replies  her  brother.  '  Heaven  and  Earth  were  brother  and  sister,  yet 
they  became  the  parents  of  the  gods  :  why  not  you  and  I  then  of 
mankind?'  But  Yama  is  still  unconvinced,  and  bids  his  sister  look 
elsewhere  for  a  husband.  This  suggestion  is  under  the  circumstances 
irritating,  and  Yarn!  fairly  loses  her  temper  and  speaks  out  her  mind. 
So  far  as  our  poem  reaches,  Yama  does  not  yield  :  yet  it  is  obvious 
that  in  the  original  form  of  the  tale  he  must  have  given  way. 

Much  more  light  from  other  literatures  is  needed  before  any 
certainty  can  be  felt  in  this  case  as  to  the  details  of  the  interpretation  : 
but  it  seems  sufficiently  clear  that  we  have  before  us  the  sincere 
attempt  of  a  theological  school  to  grapple  with  fundamental  problems 
of  morality,  such  as  the  instinct  of  shame  in  regard  to  sexual  relations, 
the  prohibition  of  marriage  between  near  relatives,  and  the  rival  claims 
of  reason  and  the  divine  law  to  man's  unquestioning  obedience.  The 
solution  suggested  in  the  Veda  is  perhaps  near  akin  to  that  of  Genesis : 
had  the  first  human  beings  had  more  faith,  the  heavenly  powers  would 
have  spared  them  the  sin  and  pain  of  an  animal  mode  of  procreation, 
and  yet  would  have  found  a  way  to  perpetuate  the  human  race. 


APPENDIX   IV. 

TABLE   OF  HYMNS. 
265.    Explanatory  Notes. 

For  a  general  explanation  of  the  arrangement  of  the  Table  of 
hymns  see  §§  255-260  above. 

The  following  are  the  abbreviations  used  in  the  respective  columns  : 

Period.  A  Archaic.  S  Strophic.  N  Normal.  C  Cretic.  #  Popu- 
lar. If  these  letters  are  in  small  italic  characters  the  corresponding 
period  is  indicated  by  the  metrical  variations  alone. 

Metre.  An.  Anustubh  (Tr.  An.  Trochaic  Gayatri  with  extra  verse). 
B  or  Brh.  Brhati.  BS  Brhati-Satobrhati.  G  Gayatri.  J  Jagati 
(Ct.  J  or  Cont.  J  Contaminated  Jagati).  Jt.  Jagati  with  final 
Tristubh  stanza.  KS  Kakubh-Satobrhatl.  Ma.  or  Mahap.  Mahapankti 
(E.  or  Ep.  with  rhythm  of  Epic  Anustubh).  P  Pahkti  (E.  or  Ep. 
with  rhythm  of  Epic  Anustubh).  Padap.  Padaparikti.  Prast.  Prastara- 
pankti.  Pur.  Purausnih.  Sat.  Satobihati.  Tr.  Tristubh  (Dvip.  Tr. 
Dvipada  Tristubh ;  Ct.  Tr.  or  Cont.  Tr.  Contaminated  Tristubh). 
Un.  lyric  Uneven  lyric.     Us.  or  Usn.  Usnih. 

Deity.  A.  or  Ag.  Agni  (A.  J  at.  Agni  Jatavedas ;  A.  Raks.  Agni 
Raksohan ;  A.  Vais.  Agni  Vaisvanara).  As.  Asvina.  Brh.  or  Brhasp. 
Bihaspati  or  Brahmanaspati.  Dan.  Danastuti.  DP  Dyaus-Prthivi. 
I.  or  Ind.  Indra.  Mar.  Marutah.  MV  Mitra-Varuna.  MVA  Mitra- 
Yaruna-Aryaman.  Pus.  Piisan.  S.  or  So.  Soma.  Sar.  Sarasvatl. 
Sav.  Savitar.  Us.  Usas.  Yar.  Yaruna.  Vis.  Visnu.  VD  Visve 
Devah. 

Metrical  notes.     See  §§255,  260. 

Linguistic  notes.  V  Forms  and  words  characteristic  of  the  Rigveda 
proper,  §§  84,  85.  AV.  Forms  and  words  characteristic  of  the  popular 
Rigveda  and  Atharvaveda,  §§  86,  87. 


266.     TABLE    OF    HYMNS. 
Mandala  I. 


Verses 

Metrical  notes 

Lin- 
guistic 

I 

Ph 

Hymn               Metre             Deity 

Tr. 

Dim. 

ABC 

D     E     F 

V     AV 

N 

S 

i 

A.  I  1-] 
1 

2,  31 
3  4-6 
4-9 
10,  11 

1  [Kusik 
G 

fr.  G 
G 

An. 

a] 

Agni 

Various2 

Indra 

27 

48 

9 

180 

80 

-  2 
1     5 

-  1 
4  12 
1     4 

1  - 

2  - 
-      1 

4      1 
26     0 

8     0 
73  10 
41     3 

1  2  and  3  i-3,  7-12;  2  2,  7  Tr.  G. 
3  1-3  As.,  7-9  VD.,  10-12  Sarasvati. 


2  1-3  Vayu,  4-6  Ind.  -Vayu,  7-9  MV.  j 


N 

B.  I  12-23 

12,14 

G 

Agni 

72 

-      1 

2   - 

30    0 

0 

13 
15-23  15 

it 

1 

Apriya 
Various  2 

36 
285 

-    14 

1    - 

4   - 

8    3 
60    9 

# 

23  16-18 
19-24 

»» 
Various3 

Apah 

*4 

it 

1     1 

9 

21 

_     _ 

3     1 

0  1 

1  14 

1  22  11  Tr.  G.  2  15  VD.;  16  I.;  17  I.-Var.;  18  1-5  Brh.,  6-9  Sadaspati; 

19  Agni-Marutah;  20  Rbhavah;  21  I.-A.;  22  1-4  As.,  5-8  Sav.,  9-12  Gnah,  13-15  DP., 
16-21  Vis.;  23  1-3  I.-Vayu,  4-6  MV.,  7-9  I.-Mar.,  10-12  Mar.,  13-15  Pus.         3  19  Pur., 


20  An.,  21  G. ;  22-24  Epic  An. 


Charm. 


C.  I  24-30 
Tr. 

3-5,  etc.1 

6-15 

etc.2 

13,  30  16 

1-6 

7-9 


G 

Tr. 

Tr.  G 

App.  Tr. 

An. 

G 

P 


Agni 

8 

Various 1 

162 

Varuna 

40 

Agni3 

36 

Devah  4 

8 

Ulukhala 

22 

Vanaspati 

9 

Charm 

23 

6  20 
2  1 
1     2 

1  - 

-     4 

2  1 


2   -    - 

1    - 

4     12 

3-1 
-     1 

1    - 


0    0 

60    5 

3  11 

19    0 

2    2 

0  10 

6    1 

11     5 


*243- 
Tr.  G. 


-5  Sav.,  25  Var.,  26,  27  7-9  Agni,  30  1-12  Indra,  17-19  As.,  20-22  Usas:  30  10 
2  27  1-6,  10-12  and  30  13-15.  3  30  13-15  Indra.  4  30  16  Indra. 


I  31-35 
J1 
Tr. 


Cont.Tr/ 


1  31  8,  16,  18  Tr. 


Agni 
Indra 

&gt;&gt; 
Asvina 
Savitar 


72 

1 

60 

60 

48 

44 

34  9,  12  Tr. 


35 


-      33     9 
2     11  10 


13 

15 

5 


J. 


i  1-93 
Mandala  I,  continued. 


271 


E.  I  36-43:  Kanva 

36,  39,  40         BS 

37,  etc.2  G 
38  7-9,  etc.3      Tr.  G 

1  39  Mar.,  40  Brhasp. 
42  Piisan,  43  i-6  Eudra. 


Agni,  etc.1 
Various  2 

3 


Tr.  I  Dim. 


-w 


90 
144 

28 


ABC 


12  13 
4  20 
1     2 

2  37,  38  i-6  (2  Tr.  G.),  10-15  Mar.,  41  1-6  MVA. 
38  7-9  Mar.,  41  7-9  MVA.,  43  7-9  Soma. 


D    E     F 


Lingu. 


2     2 


54  5 
52  12 
12     3 


S 


N 


F.  I  44-50:  Kanva 

44,  47,  48       j  BS 

45,  49  !  An. 
46  G 

50  1-9  ,, 

10-13  Epic  An 

1  47  As.,  48  Usas 

G.  I  51-57 :  Indra  collection 

51-54  j  J1  I  Indra 

55-57 


Agni,  etc.1 

60 

100 

2 
&gt;&gt; 

56 

Asvina 

45 

Surya 

27 

Charm 

16 

4  14 
-  1 
3  8 
1    - 


49  Usas. 


18 


3    - 

47 

3 

1     1 

18 

0 

-     2 

16 

1 

-     2 

7 

0 

-      1 

1 

1 

208 
80 


-    10 

10  18 


25 


1  51,  53  2  fin.  St.,  52  13,  15,  and  54  6, 

H.  I  58-64:  Gotama  Nodhas 


58,  60 

59 

61 

62, 

64 


03 


J1,  Tr. 
Tr. 

Gautami 

Tr. 

Jt. 


Agni 

Agni  Vais. 
Indra 

Marutah 


56 

28 
03 
86 

51) 


K.  I 

65-70 
71-73 


1  58  7-9  Tr 

65-73:  Agni  collection 

I  Pentad     I  Agni 


L.  I 

74.  etc.1 

76,  etc.2 
79  4-6,  etc.3 
80,  etc.4 
82  6,  etc.5 
84  1-6 
84  13-15,  86 
16-18 


I  Tr. 
74-93:  Gotama 


122 
120 


89 
90 


-8,  etc.7 

-4,  etc.8 

-3 


9" 
74,  75, 


G 
Tr. 

Lyric  3 

P 

J5 

An. 

G 

Tr. 

Un.  lyric6 

App.  Tr. 

Tr.  G 

G 

Epic  An. 

Tr.7 

Epic  An. 

Cont.  Tr. 

G 


a 

Agni 

73 

52 

Various  3 

12 

32 

Indra 

150 

5 

11 

136 

24 

I.,  Mar. 

12 

45 

Marutah 

20 

4 

Cosmogony 

4 

VD 

15 

7 

42 
4 

Soma8 

88 

6 

Ag.-Soma 

24 

12 

&gt;» 

9 

Tr. 


-      1 


121 

48 


9   -    - 


44 

0 

14 

0 

56 

4 

83 

5 

35 

3 

110    9 

89     8 


2 

-     9 

0 

- 

- 

3    2 

1 

1 

1 

3 

2 

2 

8  14 

9 

3 

1 

2 

1 

- 

5 

5 

- 

- 

5     4 

- 

- 

1 

1 

- 

- 

- 

- 

2     7 

12 

1 

1 

_ 

— 

— 

1     2 

7 

- 

2 

- 

-. 

- 

29 

3 

35 

0 

26 

2 

45 

0 

44  12 

7 

2 

21 

3 

2 

5 

17 

1 

0 

0 

4 

i) 

12 

3 

0 

0 

43 

6 

4 

1 

4 

4 

4 

0 

2  76,  77,  79  1-: 
84  7-9  (Dim.  Us.),  19,  20  (BS.)  to  Indra;  92  13- 
4  80-82  5,  84  10^12.  5  82  6,  83  Indra ;  85  (5, 

VD.  G  See  §  244  i.  7  90  6-8  VD.,  91  5-15  Soma. 

17  Us.),  19-21,  22,  23  to  Soma;  92  1-4  (J),  5-8,  9-"  t0  Usas- 


3  794-6(Usn.)  to  Agni; 

5  (Us.)  to  Usas,  16-18  (Us.)  to  As. 

2  Tr.'),  87  Mar.;  89  1-9  (6,  8,  9  Tr.) 

'  91  1-4,  16-18  (16  G., 


272 


Table  of  hymns 


Mandala  I,  continued. 


Tr.    Dim. 

ABC 

DBF 

Lingu. 

c 

M.  I  94-115  [Kutsa] 

! 

94-991 

Tr.2 

Agni3 

137 

2     4     2 

30    3   - 

47  15 

# 

97 

G 

j  j 

19 

-     6 

1   - 

0     2 

100-103 

Tr.4 

Indra 

170 

5     2  12 

22    9   - 

67  15 

A 

104 

»» 

&gt;&gt; 

36 

8     3     4 

4   -    - 

16    3 

105 

An.5 

3 

74 

2    5 

-    - 

24  15 

106-111 

J,  Tr.6 

Various6 

155 

2    4  10 

30    4     3 

61  14 

112-114 

7 
»» 

8 

&gt;&gt; 

198 

2     7     9 

34    8    4 

70  12 

115 

Tr. 

Surya 

i    22 

1    -    - 

14- 

|     2     5 

1  except  97. 
101   1-7  J,  8-i 


2  94  J  (2  fin.  st.  Tr.).  3  98  A.  Vais.,  99  A.  Jat. 

Tr.;   102  J.  5  with  refrain,  8  Brh.  with  refrain,  i9  Tr. 

6  106  Jt.,  107  Tr.  to  VD. ;  108,  109  Tr.  to  I.-Agni;  110  Cont.  J  (5,  9  Tr.),  Ill  Jt.  to 
Rbhavah.  7  112  J  (2  fin.  st.  Tr.);   113  Tr.;   114  Cont.  J  (2  fin.  st.  Tr.). 

8  112  As\;   113  Usas;   114  Rudra. 


N.  I  116-126  [Pajra] 


116,  117 
118,  119 
120  1-9 

10—12 
121,  122 
123-126  5 
126  6,  7 

See  §  244  ii. 


Tr. 
Tr.,  J 
Un.  lyric1 
G 
Tr. 
Tr.2 
Epic  An. 


1] 

Asvina 

200 

1 

5     4  48 

33  12    4 

84 

-     1     8 

15     2     2 

19 

10 

9     3     5 

3     2     1 

Danastuti 

9 

-    - 

Indra,  VD 

120 

29     6  14 

12     2     1 

Various3 

152 

112 

24     1     1 

Danastuti 

e| 

-    - 

-    -  1 

77  22 

51 

7 

11 

1 

0 

9 

99 

5 

33 

9 

1 

1 

125 


4i  5 


J. 


123,  124  Usas;  125-126  5  Danastuti. 


0 

127 
128 
129 

130-132 
133  1-5 
6,  7 
134,  135 
136-139 


I  127-139  [Divodasa] 

Atyasti       Agni 


Mixed2 

Atyasti 


Indra 

&gt;» 
Charm 
Indra 
Vayu 
Various4 


33 

45 

26  16    7 

! 

12- 

24 

32 

3     3     6 

-     1    - 

31 

46 

21  10    2 

2     2- 

70 

88 

7    3     7 

7     1   - 

4 

15 

-     3     2 

11-! 

6 

8 

4    3    3 

_  _  _  1 

1    47 

56 

10    5     2 

7     2     1 

|    69 

97 

16     1 

3    6    3; 

50  1 

30  1 

47  0 

93  4 

1  12 

6  1 

61  3 

78  6 


1  130  is  Tr.  2  133  1  Tr.,  2-4  Epic  An.,  5  G. 

11  Tr.  4  136,  137  MV.,  138  Pusan,  139  VD. 


For  the  following  variations  of  Atyasti  see  Ch.  ix,  App. ;  127  6  (No 
(Nos.  81,  80);  133  6  (No.  85) ;  135  7,  8  (No.  74);  137  (No.  77). 


■  136  7  Tr. ;  139  5  B., 
129  8,  9 


i  94-191 


278 


M  and  ALA  I,  continued. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

s 

P.  I  140-164:  Mamateya 

c 

140,  146 

J,  Tr.1 

Agni 

72 

3 

_ 

2 

19 

_ 

2 

29     9 

141,  144 

J2 

_     J5 

80 

5 

2 

7 

7 

3 

_ 

54    6 

c 

142 

An. 

Apriya 

52 

- 

- 

1 

- 

1!)     3 

c 

143 

Jt. 

Agni 

32 

1 

- 

_ 

4 

_ 

1 

17    0 

145 

Cont.  J 

&gt;  j 

20 

3 

1 

2 

1 

2 

_ 

3     3 

a 

147-149 

Tr.3 

jj 

55 

11 

3 

5 

3 

- 

- 

33     1 

150 

Un.  lyric4 

•i 

3 

6 

1 

2 

1 

_ 

2 

_ 

6     0 

151-153 

Tr.5 

MV 

80 

3 

8 

10 

5 

1 

_ 

52     2 

154-156 

J6 

Visnu 

68 

4 

1 

14 

3 

1 

2 

25     1 

C 

157 

7 

Asvina 

24 

_ 

1 

_ 

4 

_ 

_ 

7     1 

158  1-5 

Tr. 

&gt;&gt; 

20 

2 

3 

4 

2 

_ 

_ 

16     1 

6 

An. 

4 

- 

1 

_ 

- 

1     0 

C 

159,  160 

J 

DP 

40 

1 

_ 

_ 

8 

- 

_ 

18     1 

# 

161 

Jt. 

Kbhavah 

56 

1 

_ 

6 

11 

1 

4 

6  29 

# 

162,  163 

Tr.8 

[Eitual]' 

139 

1 

1 

- 

6 

24 

1 

21 

12  54 

# 

164 

Cont.Tr.9 

202 

6. 

1 

3 

6 

27 

5 

20 

9  72 

1  140  io  and  2  fin.  st.  Tr. ;  146  5  J.  2  141  2  fin.  st.  Tr. 

4  see  §  242  ii.  5  151  J.  6  154  Tr.  ?  157  2  fin.  st.  Tr. 

Tr.  (3,  6  J).  9  164  42  11.  11.  8.  8,  51  Epic  An. 


3  149  Viraj. 
8  162  Cont. 


Q.  I  165 

165,  166, 171  I 

167-169 

170 

172 

173,  174 

175,  176 

177 

178 

179 

180,  181 

182 

183-185 

186 

187 

188 

189,  190 


#      191 


-191 

Tr.1 

Tr.1 

Epic  An 

G 

Tr. 

An.4 

Tr. 

5  5 

5 
J) 
6 

j" 

Tr. 


Mana 

Ind.-Mar.2 


Marutah 
Indra 


[Agastya] 
A&amp;vina 


G9 

Tr. 

EpicAn.10 


VD 

Apriya 
Agni, 

Brhasp. 
Charm 


139 

108 

5 

15 

9 

90 

4 

39 

19 

19 

21 

3  1 

74 

31 

82 

43 

37 

33 

62 

69 

6 

2 

6 

31 

6 

15 

2 

- 

1 

1 

- 

43 

10 

15 

8 

3 

1 

1 

- 

2 

5 

- 

2 

_ 

1 

1 

12 

3 

13 

- 

2 

2 

5 

2 

9 

16 

2 

5 

5 

6 

2 

- 

7 

2 

7 

1 

3 

3  2 

7  - 

1 

8  1 
-  1 

3  1 

4  - 

3  ~ 
7  1 

4  6 
2  - 


5   - 


4     3 


63  6 

77  3 

-  6 

2  1 

68  1 

29  2 

9  3 

15  0 

2  11 


57 

11 
44 

•_&gt;:. 
i:&gt; 

2 

40 


5  40 


1  166,  168  J  (2  fin.  st.  Tr.).         2  166  Marutah. 
176  6  Tr. ;  for  175  i  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  29. 
7  182  6,  8  Tr.  8  185  DP.  9  187  x,  3.  5-7  An. 

10  191  10-12  Mahap.,  13  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  67, 


3170iB.)5Tr.  4175  6, 

179  5  B.  6  180  Cont.  Tr. 

for  11  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  32. 


18 


274 


Table  of  hymns 


Mandala  II. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B    C 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

N 

[Grtsamada] 

1,2 

J 

Agni 

112 

5 

2     3 

10 

1 

- 

71      7 

c 

3 

Tr.1 

Apriya 

44 

- 

1    - 

10 

2 

2 

6     4 

A 

4 

,, 

Agni 

36 

12 

2     5 

1 

- 

1 

35     0 

5 

An. 

32 

2 

_ 

1 

1 

9     1 

6 

Tr.  G 

»» 

24 

1 

- 

1 

- 

16     0 

7,8,  41 2 

G 

Various  3 

84 

1 

2 

1 

1 

22     5 

# 

86 

Epic  An.4 

Ag.-I.-So. 

4 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1     0 

9,10 

Tr. 

Agni 

48 

2 

2     2 

4 

1 

- 

16     2 

S 

11    1-20 

11  21,  14-18, 

Virat- 
sthana 

Indra 

80 

— 

4  13 

3 

— 

1 

43     4 

21 

Tr.5 

1, 

198 

8 

6  20 

19 

5 

4 

74  11 

c 

12,  13 

Tr.,  Jt. 

II 

111 

1 

2     2 

17 

6 

2 

17  13 

A 

19,  20,  22 

Tr.6 

'» 

77 

7 

35 

6    9 

12 

3 

1 

85     4 

23-26 

J7 

Brhasp. 

169 

6 

4     6 

21 

5 

1 

64     6 

27-32  3 

Tr.8 

Various  9 

215 

10 

2  15 

24 

1 

1 

94  19 

# 

32  4,  s 

Cont.  J 

Eaka 

8 

- 

-     1 

1 

2 

1 

3     1 

# 

6-8 

Epic  An. 

Sinlvall 

12 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0     5 

33-38 

Tr." 

Various  n 

269 

9 

1  21 

28 

6 

5 

108  25 

C 

39,  40 

Tr. 

12 

11 

54 

- 

-      2 

10  22 

- 

6  14 

A 

41  16-18 

An.13 

SarasvatI 

1 

11 

- 

1 

- 

- 

1     1 

# 

42,  43 

Ct.Tr.,  J 

Charms 

23 

- 

-    - 

4 

1 

3 

1  24 

1   3  6,  7  J- 

7-9  As.,  10-12  Ind., 


z  exc.  8  6. 
t3-i5  VD., 


41  16-18. 

IQ-2!    DP. 


3  7,  8  Agni,  41  1-3  Vayu, 
4  or  G  with  extra  verse. 
17,  21  Jt.  6  For  22  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  Nos.  87,  79,  84.  7  23  15,  19, 

8  30  11,  32  1-3  J;  31  Jt.  9  27,  29  Adityah,  28  Varuna,  30-32  3  VD. 
36,  37  J.  u  33  Eudra,  34  Mar.,  35  Apam  Napat,  36,  37  VD.,  38  Sav. 
40  Soma-Pusan.  13  41  18  B. 


4-6  MV., 
5  16  J, 
24  i2  Tr. 
10  34  Jt., 
12  39  As., 


ii  l-iii  62 


275 


Mandala  III. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B     C 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

N 

[Kusika] 

1,  etc.1 

Tr.1 

Agni  '2 

367 

17 

10  10  43 

63 

3 

1 

153  15 

2,  3,  26  i-6 

J 

Ag.  Vais.3 

128 

4 

3    9 

18 

2 

- 

90    5 

4  i-7 

Tr. 

Apriya 

28 

1 

2     1 

1 

1 

- 

17     0 

c 

8-n 

, 

&gt;» 

16 

- 

1    - 

3 

1 

- 

2     1 

8.-9 

4 

&gt;&gt; 

Vanaspati 

28 

8 

1 

-      1 

3 

- 

- 

4     1 

# 

IO,     II 

&gt;» 

»1 

8 

- 

-    - 

1 

- 

- 

0    3 

c 

9  i-8 

Brh. 

Agni 

8 

24 

- 

2   - 

1 

1 

1 

14     1 

&gt;&gt; 

9 

Tr. 

Ag.-Devah 

4 

- 

-    - 

2 

- 

0    0 

10 

Dim.Usn. 

Agni 

27 

- 

2 

1 

- 

1    17    0 

s 

11,  etc.5 

G5 

Various  5 

283 

11 

10 

2 

2 

138    8 

13 

An. 

Agni 

28 

.3 

3 

- 

- 

!    13     0 

16 

BS6 

&gt;&gt; 

9 

15 

- 

1    - 

- 

- 

- 

15     1 

c 

17 

Tr. 

Ag.  Jat. 

20 

1 

-    - 

6 

- 

- 

10    0 

25 

Viraj 

Agni 

15 

- 

1     2 

1 

- 

- 

8    0 

* 

28 

Mixed  7 

9 

11 

2 

-      1 

- 

— 

- 

0     1 

# 

29 

Cont.Tr.8 

48 

16 

1 

-     4 

5 

- 

- 

10    4 

30-32,  etc.9 

Tr.9 

Indra  9 

424 

6 

3  36 

39 

7 

5 

172  22 

33  i— 12 

48 

- 

-     3 

5 

1 

- 

6     5 

# 

13 

Epic  An. 

Charm 

4 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0     4 

c 

34-36,  39 

Tr. 

Indra 

152 

- 

1     9 

31 

5 

- 

45     7 

# 

37  11 

Epic  An. 

»&gt; 

4 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1     1 

44,  45 

Brh. 

11 

10 

30 

- 

2     1 

— 

1 

— 

i    10     4 

# 

52  1-4 

G 

ji 

12 

- 

1 

- 

- 

1     1 

# 

5-8 

Tr.10 

16 

- 

-    - 

5 

- 

- 

7     0 

C 

53z-8 

,1 

fJ 

28 

- 

-    - 

4 

- 

1 

5     3 

9—16 

Mixed11 

24 

7 

2 

1     4 

4 

1 

1 

8    4 

# 

17-23 

12 

Charm 

17 

11 

- 

-     1 

2 

- 

1 

2  19 

24 

App.  Tr. 

Indra 

4 

1 

-     1 

- 

- 

- 

3     0 

c 

54 

VD 

88 

- 

1     3 

19 

1 

- 

28    5 

55-59  5,  etc.13 

Various 13 

219 

6 

6  23 

28 

2 

1 

64  12 

c 

60 

j" 

Kbhavah 

28 

- 

-     2 

5 

2 

- 

11     2 

1  1,  5-7,  14,  15,  18-20,  21  (a,  3  An.,  4  11.  11.  11.  8,  5  Sat.),  22  (4  An.),  23 

(3  Sat.),  26  7-9.  2  Several  hymns  include  the  Devah.  s  26  4-6  to  Agni 

and  Marutah.  4  8  3,  7  An.  ■  11  (5  Tr.  G.),  24,  27  to  Agni;  12  to  Ind.- 

Agni:  37  i-io,  40,  41  (3,  8  Tr.  G.),  42,  51  10-12  to  Indra;  59  6-9  to  Mitra;  62  4-6 

Brhasp.,  7-9  Pusan,  10-12  Sav.,  13-15  Soma,  16-18  MV. 

verses  in  this  hymn  have  mostly  trochaic  cadence. 

4  Tr.,  5  J.  8  29  1,  4,  10,  12  Epic  Anustubh. 

43,    46,    47    (I.-Mar.),  48-51  6,   51   7-9   (I.-Mar.),   53    1 

10  52  6  J.  n  53  9,  11,  14,  15  Tr.,  10,  16  J,  12  An., 


The  Brhati  dimeter 
7  28  1,  2,  6  G.,  3  Usnih, 
9  also  38  (Cosmogony), 

(I.-Parvata) ;    51    1-3   J. 

13  G.  12  53  17,  19. 


21,  23  Tr.,  18  B.,  20,  22  Epic  An. 
62  1-3  I.-Varuna. 


13  55-57  VD.,  58  As.,  59  1-5  Mitra,  61  Usas, 


18—2 


276 


Table  of  hymns 


Mandala  IV. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B    C 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

s 

[Vamadeva] 

1-3,6 

Tr.1 

Agni 

269 

6 

29 

9  27 

13 

1 

1 

181     8 

4,5 

2 

120 

5 

-   23 

15 

1 

2 

61  10 

7 

Mixed3 

&gt;  y 

24 

20 

1 

1     4 

1 

- 

1 

16    0 

8,  9,  etc.4 

G 

Ag.,Indra 

269 

8  21 

3 

1 

120    8 

10 

Padap.5 

Agni 

8 

- 

-     4 

- 

- 

1 

13     0 

N 

11,  12 

Tr. 

&gt;&gt; 

48 

2 

2     4 

12 

- 

- 

21     2 

&gt;&gt; 

18  x-4 

»&gt; 

Surya 

16 

1 

-      1 

2 

- 

- 

2     1 

# 

5 

&gt;&gt; 

,, 

4 

0    2 

N 

14 

ii 

VD 

16 

- 

-    - 

3 

- 

- 

1     0 

16,  17,  etc.6 

&gt;&gt; 

Indra6 

450 

39  16  35 

31 

2 

5 

307  10 

# 

18 

&gt;» 

[Indra] 

52 

- 

-     3 

4 

1 

2 

4  19 

N 

24  i-8 

ii 

Indra 

32 

1 

1     2 

5 

_ 

_ 

15     0 

# 

9,  io 

T,Ep.An. 

4 

4 

- 

1    - 

- 

- 

- 

0     1 

N 

25 

Tr. 

Indra 

32 

1 

-    - 

5 

1 

- 

8     1 

ii 

33-37  4 

Tr.7 

Bbhavah 

176 

6 

4  12 

21 

2 

_ 

79    7 

ii 

37  5-8 

An. 

ii 

16 

- 

2 

1 

- 

11     1 

38-39  5,  etc.8 

Tr.8 

Various8 

244 

21 

9  13 

14 

6 

2 

114  10 

* 

39  6 

Epic  An. 

Dadhikra 

4 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0     1 

46-48 

G,  An.9 

Vayu9 

55 

2 

7 

- 

- 

28    0 

N 

49,  etc.10 

G 

Various10 

54 

1 

2 

_ 

_ 

17     0 

&gt;  &gt; 

50-57  311 

Tr.,  J11 

n 

192 

4 

3 

5  10 

17 

1 

1 

57  11 

# 

57  4-8 

EpicAn.1'- 

Charm 

5 

14 

0    9 

# 

58 

Tr.13 

Ghrta 

44 

- 

-      2 

10 

2 

4 

9     3 

1  1  1-3  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  Nos.  75,  62,  83.  2  4  Agni  Kaksohan,  5  Agni  Vais. 

3  7  i  J,  2-6  An.,  7-n  Tr.  4  8,  9,  15  i-6  Agni :  15  7-10  Dan. ;  30-32  21  Indra  ; 

22-24  Dan.  5  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  21;  5  No.  52.  6  16,  17,  19-23,  26-29; 

26,  27  Indra-Syena,  28  Ind.-Soma.  7  36  Jt.  8  38,  39  1-5  Tr.,  40  J  (1  Tr.) 

to  Dadhikra;  41,  42  to  I.-Var.,  43-45  to  As.  (45  Jt.).  9  46  G.,  47,  48  An. ;  46, 

47  to  Indra- Vayu.     '    10  49  Ind.-Brh. ;  52  Usas;  55  8-10  VD.  (8  Tr.  G.) ;  56  5-7  DP. 

11  50  1-9  Tr.  to  Brh.,  10,  11  Jt.  to  Ind.-Brh.;   51  Tr.  to  Usas;    53  J,   54  Jt.,  to 
Savitar;  55  1-7  Tr.  to  VD.;  56  1-4  Tr.  to  DP.;  57  1-3  to  Ksetrapati  (1  An.,  2,  3  Tr.). 

12  57  5  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  14,  8  Tr.  13  58  n  J  to  Agni. 


iv  1-v  87 


277 


Mandala  V. 


Tr. 

i 

Dim. 

A     B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

1 
Lingu. 

A 

A.    The  Atri  collection 

s 

2 

Tr. 

Agni 

49 

3   - 

5 

2 

_ 

1 

13     2 

6,  7,  etc.1 

Atri  An. 

332 

29  42 

1 

1 

180     6 

33  1-7 

Tr. 

Indra 

27 

15     1 

5 

1 

1 

1 

13     2 

8-io 

&gt;} 

Danastuti 

12 

2   - 

- 

2 

- 

- 

8    0 

35,  etc.2 

Atri  An. 

Indra 

3 

80 

6    6 

- 

- 

49    0 

36 

Tr.3 

3 

24 

1     1 

4 

2 

- 

- 

15     2 

41 

VD 

79 

28  11 

10 

4 

- 

- 

54     7 

s 

43 

fJ 

60 

5   - 

5 

4 

1 

- 

!    39     2 

45 

M 

44 

8     2 

6 

5 

- 

- 

27     0 

50,  etc.4 

Atri  An.4 

Various  4 

6 

380 

44  56 

7 

4 

169  11 

51  1-3,  etc.5 

G5 

5 

5) 

94 

3  12 

1 

- 

1    32     5 

53,  56,  876 

Lyric6 

Marutah 

57 

77 

12  26 

6 

6 

1 

- 

67    3 

68,  70,  82  7-9 

Tr.  G 

Various'7 

36 

1     3 

- 

- 

9    1 

1  6  (P.),  7,  9,   10,  16-23  (19  i,   2  Tr.  G.),  24  (Un.  lyric,  see  §  242  iii),  25. 
2  35,  38,  39;  40  1-3  Usnih.  3  36  3  J;  6  Dan.  4  50  to  Netar;  51  4  G.  to 

Vayu;  5-7  Dim.  Us.  to  I.-Vayu;  8-10  Dim.  Us.  to  Agni  and  VD. ;  52  to  Marutah 
(15-17' Danastuti);  64-67  to  MV. ;  72  Usnih  to  MV. ;  73,  74  to  A6.J  75  P.  and 
78  1-3  Usnih  to  As.;   84  Prthivl;   86  Ind.-Ag.  5  51  1-3  to  Agni  and  VD. ; 

61  (5  An.,  9  Sat.)  to  Marutah,  etc. ;  71  to  MV. ;  82  1-6  to  Savitar.  6  53  KS.  (12 

Tr.  G.),  see  §  248  i;  56  B.  (3,  7  Sat.) ;  87  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  63.  7  68,  70  to 

MV.;  82  7-9  to  Savitar. 


N 


B.    The  later  collection 


1,  3,  etc.1 

Tr.,  J1 

4 

Tr. 

5 

G 

13,  14,  etc.3 

3 

29,  etc.4 

Tr.4 

30  15 

,, 

40  5-9 

Tr.,Epic 

An.5 

42  1-17,  etc.6 

Tr.,  J6 

i8,44,  etc.7 

7 
&gt;&gt; 

44  14,  15 

Cont.  Tr. 

51  14,  15 

Epic  An. 

785-9 

»5 

79 

Pahkti 

83 

Cont.Tr.8 

ition 

Agni1 

216 

1 

2 

44 

Apriya 

30 

Agni3 
Indra 

276 

85 

Danastuti 

4 

Charm 

12 

8 

Various  6 

241 

7 

402 

Agni 

8 

Charm 

8 
20 

Usas 

43 

Par  j  any  a 

36 

4 

2 

•2 
2 

1 
6 

2  19 
-     2 

2 

5  18 

23    - 

11     1 

2 

1 

21     2 

1 

-    - 

2     4 

1 

8 

1  3 

2  29 

30  11 
37  11 

_ 

1 

1 

- 

1 
-     2 

1 
4   - 

85 

7 

17 

3 

6 

5 

32 

0 

107  18 

1 

1 

1 

it 

67  17 

144  23 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

22 

0 

2 

11 

#      44  r4,  15  Cont.  Tr.    Agni  8  -    -     4 

^       SI  T.     T?  T?.n\o.  An      f!hfl.rm 

i 
c 
# 

1  1,  3  Tr.,  8,  11  J,  12,  15  Tr.,  27  1-3  Tr.  (Dan.),  28  1-3  Tr.  (2  J).  2  4  9-n  A. 

Jat.  3  13,  14;  26;  27  4-6  An.  (Dan.);  28  4-6  (4  An.).  4  29,  30  1-14  (12-14 

Dan.),  31,  32,  34  1-8  J,  9  Tr.  (Dan.),  37,  40  4.  5  5,  9  Epic  An.  6  42  1-17  Tr., 

46  3-6  J  to  VD.;  62  Tr.,  63  J,  69  Tr.  to  MV. ;  78  4  Tr.  to  As.;  80  Tr.  to  Usas, 
81  J  to  Sav.,  85  Tr.  to  Varuna.  7  42  18  Tr.  to  AS. ;  44  1-13  J,  46  r,  2  Jt.,  47  Tr., 

48  J,  49  Tr.,  51  n-13  J  to  VD.;  46  7,  8  Jt.  to  Gnah;  54  J  (14  Tr.),  55  Jt.,  57  J  with 
2  fin.  st.  Tr.,  58  Tr.,  59  Jt.,  60  Tr.  (7,  8  J)  to  Marutah;  76,  77  Tr.  to  Asvina. 
8  9  Epic  An. 


278 


Table  of  hymns 


Mandala  VI. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B 

c 

D 

E 

P 

Lingu. 

A 

Bharadvaja 

1. 

The  Agni  series 

c 

1 

Tr. 

Agni 

52 

2 

- 

4 

5 

- 

- 

34     1 

2  i-io,  14 

An. 

,» 

60 

4 

10 

- 

- 

39     0 

2  H,  3,  4 

Tr. 

,» 

69 

13 

5 

10 

1 

- 

- 

65     2 

c 

5-8 

1 
»» 

1 

112 

3 

- 

2 

13 

1 

- 

08     4 

1) 

9 

Ag.  Vai£. 

28 

- 

1 

- 

2 

- 

1 

3     6 

10-13 

,, 

Agni 

98 

22 

7 

17 

3 

1 

1 

91     2 

15  i-xs 

J,  Tr.2 

»» 

62 

1 

7 

7 

6 

3 

- 

- 

47     0 

16-18 

Mixed  3 

,  j 

5 

7 

- 

- 

- 

- 

2 

- 

5     1 

# 

J9 

Tr. 

it 

4 

- 

- 

- 

2 

- 

- 

0     2 

16  1-45 

G4 

i» 

126 

5 

8 

- 

- 

58     4 

46 

Tr. 

&gt;&gt; 

4 

1 

- 

3 

- 

- 

- 

5     0 

• 

47,  48 

Epic  An. 

»&gt; 

8 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0     3 

1  7,  8  to  Ag.  Vais. 
4  16  25-27  Tr.  G. 


7  6,  7  J,  8  Jt. 


15 


1-9 


15  16  Tr. 


An.,  18  B. 


2.     The  Indra  series 


17,  20-26 

18,  19,  30-32 
27 

28  1-7 

8 
29,  etc.3 
42,  43,  44  1-6 

44  7-9 

22—24 
45 
46 

47  1-5 
6-14 
15-18 
19-21 
22—25 
26-28 
29-31 


Tr. 


Epic  An. 

Tr. 

An.4 

Pentad 

Tr. 

G 

BS 

Tr. 

Cont.  Tr. 
Tr.5 
Mixed 6 
Tr.7 
Cont.  Tr. 


ries 
Indra 

346 

1 

169 

1 

32 

28 

1 

Charm 

4 

Indra 

252 

1 

50 

12 

Soma 

12 

Indra 

100 

21 

35 

Soma 

20 

Indra 

36 

16 

VD 

9 

3 

Danastuti 

6 

4 

Charm 

12 

j, 

12 

78  18  39 

34 

2 

4 

8     3     8 

25 

4 

- 

2-2 

5 

- 

3 

-    -     1 

2 

- 

- 

36     6  39 

13 

_ 

1 

3     2     1 

— 

- 

8     7 

— 

2 

— 

7     7     4 

- 

1 

1 

1-1 

2 

- 

- 

3   -    - 

1 

- 

- 

_    _    _ 

2 

- 

3 

1     1    - 

3 

- 

- 

1-1 

1 
2 
2 

- 

- 

1   -    - 

1 

3 

231 

18 

100 

8 

16 

2 

2 

6 

0 

2 

192 

12 

28 

0 

5 

1 

3 

0 

61 

0 

34 

3 

5 

1 

24 

2 

0 

1 

2 

2 

5 

1 

0 

2 

0 

7 

1  27  7,  8  Danastuti. 
43  Dim.  Usnih. 
7  47  27  J. 


2  28  2-4  J. 
47  19  B. 


3  29,  33-41,  44  10-21.  4  42  4  B., 

6  47  22  Tr.,  23  An.,  24  Tr.  G.,  25  Dvip.  Tr. 


vi  1-vii  33 


279 


Mandala  VI,  continued. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

ABC 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

3.     The  Visve  Devah  series 

48  1-21,  etc.1 

BS1 

VD1 

36 

69 

15    6    6 

5 

3 

- 

65    4 

# 

22 

Epic  An. 

Cosmogony 

4 

-    - 

- 

- 

0    3 

49,  etc" 

Tr. 

VD2 

193 

21  12  19 

6 

1 

2 

105    6 

# 

51  16 

Epic  An. 

4 

-    - 

- 

- 

0    0 

# 

52  1-3 

Tr. 

Charm 

12 

_    _    _ 

1 

- 

- 

0    3 

c 

4-6,  etc.3 

3 

Various  3 

42 

18 

1   -    - 

8 

1 

- 

17    8 

7-12,53-57 

G 

Piisan  4 

134 

!    1     4 

- 

- 

30  15 

c 

59  7-10,  etc.5 

5 

Various  5 

61 

i    1     1 

1 

- 

29    0 

c 

61  1-3,  etc.6 

J,  Tr.6 

6 

64 

1    2   -     5 

11 

1 

- 

39    3 

63-68  8 

Tr. 

7 

205 

55  24  31 

19 

- 

- 

143    6 

C 

68  9-1 1 

Jt. 

I.-Var. 

12 

_    _    _ 

1 

1 

- 

6    0 

69-71,  73 

Tr.8 

Various  8 

92 

|    1     2     1 

16 

- 

- 

45     3 

72 

Cont.  Tr. 

I.-Soma 

20 

2-3 

2 

1 

4 

5    0 

# 

74 

Tr. 

S.-Eudra 

16 

-    -      1 

4 

- 

1 

1     8 

# 

75 

Cont.Tr.9 

Charm 

52 

25 

1-21 

8 

2 

4 

2  45 

1  with  51  13-15  Dim.  Usnih  to  VD.;  60  13-15  to  Ind.-Agni  (13  Tr.,  14  B.,  15  An. 
2  49-51  12,  52  13-15;  60  1-3  to  Ind.-Agni.  3  52  4-6,  16,  17  to  VD.;  58  (2  J.)  to 

Piisan;  59  1-6  B.  to  Ind.-Agni.  4  52  7-12  to  VD.  5  59  7-10  (An.)  and  60  4-12 

to  Ind.-Agni;  61  4-12  (10-12  Tr.  G)  to  Sarasvatl.       6  61 1-3  J,  13,  14  Jt.  to  SarasvatI; 
62  Tr.  to  Asvina.  7  63  1-8  As.,  9-n  Dan.;  64,  65  Usas;  66  Mar.;  67  MV.; 

68  1-8  Ind.-Varuna.  8  69  Ind.-Visnu;  70  DP.  (J);  71  Sav.  (1-3  J);  73  Brhasp. 

9  75  12,  13,  15,  16,  19  Epic  An.,  17  Pahkti. 


Mandala  VII. 


Vasistha 

The  Agni  and  Indra  series 


1. 

1,  3,  4,  7,  8 

2  1-7 

5,  9-13 

6 

14,  16,  32 

15 

17 

18  1-21 
22—25 
19-30,31io-i2 
31  i-9 
33 


Tr.1 


BS4 
G 

Dvip.  Tr. 
Tr. 


G 

Tr. 


Agni 
Apriya 
Agni2 
3 

Various  4 

Agni 

[Apriya] 

Indra 

Danastuti 

Indra 

i  [Vasistha] 


201 
28 

122 
28 
66 

14 

84 

16 

309 

56 


27 


11 

24 

58 

2 

1 

3 

4 

1 

3 

1 

2 

5 

16 

11 

12 

1 

- 

- 

- 

4 

1 

3 

6 

30  21 

56 

2 

- 

3 

9  3  3 

1  -  - 

26  2  - 

3  -  - 

7  4- 

1  - 

2  -  - 

17  2  - 
1  -  - 

18  -  - 

11  1  1 


102 
14 
58 
10 
79 
19 


8  0 

34    7 

6    0 

218    9 

9  1 
1  24 


1  1  1-18  Viraj.        2  5,  13  Agni  Vais.        3  6  6,  7  Agni  Vais. 
16  to  Agni;  32  (3  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  72)  to  Indra.  5  22 


4  14  (1  B.,  2,  3  Tr.), 
[-8,  31  10-12  Viraj. 


280 


Table  of  hymns 


M  and  ALA  VII,  continued. 


Tr. 

1 
Dim.      ABC 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

2.     The  first  Visve  Devah  series 

34  1-21,  etc.1 

Pentad 

VD1 

64 

-    -      2 

_ 

2 

1 

28     4 

22—25 

Tr. 

&gt;&gt; 

15 

1-2 

2 

- 

- 

2     2 

# 

35 

j&gt; 

tf 

59 

2    -    - 

6 

2 

7 

9     6 

36-40 

5J 

149 

15  22  25 

7 

1 

_ 

74    4 

c 

41,  44,  59  7,  8 

»&gt; 

Various  3 

55 

2-4 

9 

S 

2 

10     5 

42,  43 

)&gt; 

Agni&amp;VD 

42 

4     5  11 

2 

_ 

_ 

21     1 

c 

45-48,  etc.4 

4 

Various  4 

105 

4     16 

7 

- 

1 

44     2 

# 

49 

j&gt; 

Apah 

15 

-     1    - 

2 

1 

_ 

2     2 

# 

50 

Cont.Tr. 

Charm 

16 

2   -    - 

2 

i 

1 

0  13 

c 

55  1,  59  9-11 

G 

Various  5 

12 

-     1 

- 

_ 

2     0 

* 

55  2—4 

Lyric6 

Charm 

12 

-     2 

- 

- 

1     0 

# 

5-8 

Epic  An. 

&gt;» 

16 

-    - 

- 

2 

0     8 

56  12-58 

Tr. 

Marutah 

102 

9     5  24 

2 

— 

_ 

63     3 

59  1-6 

BS 

» » 

9 

15 

13     1 

_ 

1 

-  1 

10     2 

# 

12 

Epic  An. 

Charm 

4 

-    - 

1 

0    3 

1  with  56  i-ii  to  Marutah. 
59  7,  8  Marutah.  4  45  Sav. 

Adityah ;  53  DP. ;  54  Vastospati. 
Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  54. 


2  41  1,  44  1  J.  3  41  Bhaga,  44  Dadhikra, 

46  Kudra  (Jt.);  47  Apah;  48  Kbhavah;  51,  52 

5  55  1  Vastospati,  59  9-1 1  Marutah.  6  see 


C 


60-65 

66  1-9,  etc.i 

10-15,  etc.2 

16 
67-73 
75-77 
78-80 
82,  83 
84-88 
89  1-4 

90,91 
92-100 6 
101 
103 

104  1-24 

25 


etc. 


Tr. 
G 

BS 

Pur. 

Tr.3 


J 

Tr. 

G5 

J 

Tr. 


Cont.  Tr. 
Epic  An. 


vah  series 

MV 

149 

Various 1 

82 

2 

32 

52 

Surya 

1 

2 

Asvina 

177 

Usas 

81 

46 

I.-Varuna 

76 

Varuna  4 

120 

Various 5 

18 

Charm 

4 

I.-Vayu 

51 

Various 7 

187 

Parjanya 

23 

36 

4 

Charms 

96 

Ind.-Soma 

4 

8     8  25 

4  13 

5     8     1 

1    - 

7  14  35 

1     1     9 

1-1 

1-1 

5  11  25 

-     2 

-    -     2 

18  13  26 

1     1   - 

2-1 

_    -     4 

-    - 

8 

2 

1 

46     5 

- 

- 

42     1 

- 

- 

1 

i    47     1 

- 

- 

0     2 

19 

4 

2 

105     8 

12 

- 

1 

32     5 

14 

- 

1 

27     4 

4 

4 

2 

22     5 

2 

1 

■d 

57  11 

- 

- 

3     2 

1 

- 

- 

1     0 

8 

1 

- 

27     3 

16 

2 

2 

88     4 

5 

- 

- 

2     7 

5 

1 

2 

4  28 

19 

5 

3 

7  39 

- 

- 

0    0 

1  66  1-3,  7-9,  17-19  MV.,  4-6  Adityah;  94  Ind.-Ag.;  96  4-6  Sarasvat.         2  66  10-15 
MVA.;  74  As.;  81  Usas;  96  1-3  (3  Prast.)  Sar.  3  68  1-7  Viraj.  4  84,  85 

Ind.-Varuna.  5  89  1-4  (4  Tr.  G)  Charm;  102  Parjanya.  6  except  94,  96. 

7  92  I.-Vayu;  93  I.-Agni;  95  Sar.;  97,  98  Ind.-Brh.;  99,  100  Visnu.  8  103  1 

Epic  An. 


vii  34:-viii  31 


2M 


Mandala   VIII. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

ABC 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

s 

A.  VIII  1-11 :  Kanva  col- 
lections 

1,  3,  41 

BS1 

Indra 2 

95 

202 

18  21  12 

7 

3 

1 

146  11 

# 

133 

Tr. 

Dan. 

4 

-    -     1 

- 

- 

- 

0     2 

# 

34 

» 5 

4 

-    -     1 

- 

- 

1         0    3 

2 

Tr.  G3 

Indra  3 

127 

2    5 

- 

- 

!   56     7 

# 

3  24 

P  (Ep.) 

5 

1    - 

- 

- 

0    3 

5 

G4 

Asvina5 

11110 

4    5 

3 

- 

I   44     2 

6,  7,  9-11 6 

G6 

Various  6 

30    324 

2  23     1 

4 

3 

3 

141     9 

8,  9  7-9,16-18 

An. 

Asvina  7 

104 

-     6 

9 

- 

34     1 

1  1  1-32  B. 

3  21—23,  4  19~ 2 

37  P.,  38  B.,  39  An. 
9  1-6,  10-15,  J9- 
Usas  and  As. 


(2,  4  Sat.);  3  1-23  (21  Tr.  An.,  22,  23  G);  4  1-21  (21  Pur.).        2  1  30-32, 

Dan.;  4  15-18  Pusan.  3  2  40-42  G  (Dan.).  4  5  32,  35  Tr.  G, 

5  5  37-39  Dan.         6  6  Indra  (46-48  Dan.);  7  Mar.  (33  Tr.  G) ; 


-ai,  10  As.  (mixed  metres);  11  Agni  (4  Tr.  G,  10  Tr.). 


7  9  16-1 


A  I     B.  VIII  12-31 :  Various 


early  collections 

12, 13, 18  1-9    Dim.  Us.  !  Indra 1 

14.  17  1-13       G 

Us.  Various 2 

Tr.  G  Indra 

KS3  Various4 

Usnih 5 


!  15,  etc.2 

!  16 
19-22 
23-26 


27-30 
31 


Various  7 
G8 


VD. 


222; 

84 

26 

601 

36 

144 

204 

101 

228 

45 

92 

61 1 

6  13 

2    3 

12     8 

5 

1     4 

45  28  32 

40  41 

16 

11  13 

3 

7     6 

11 


138  4 

12  7 

29  2 

18  0 

171  11 

175  7 

36  8 

19  1 


1  18  1-9  Adityah.  2  15  Indra  (4-6  Dim.  Us.) ;  17  14,  15  Ind.  and  Vastospati 

(BS.);  18  10-22  Adityah.  3  19  34  Us.,  37  P.;  22  1,  3,  5,  7  B.,  8  An.,  12  see  Ch.  ix, 

App.  No.  45.  4  19  1-33  Agni,  34,  35  MVA.,  36,  37  Dan.;  20  Marutah;  21  1-16 

Indra,  17,  18  Dan.;  22  As.  5  24  30,  26  20  An.;  26  16,  19,  ai,  25  G.  6  23  Agni; 

24  1-27  Indra,  28-30  Dan.;  25  1-9  MV.,  10-21  VD.,  22-24  Dan.;  26  1-19  As.,  20-25  Vayu. 
7  27  BS.;  28  G  (4  Pur.);  29  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  4;  30  see  §  248  ii.        8  31  15-18  P. 


282 


Table  of  hymns 


Mandala  VIII,  continued. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E     F 

Lingu. 

s 

C.  VIII  32-59 :  Kanva  and 
other  collections 

32,  34  16-18 

G 

Indra x 

99 

_ 

7 

5   - 

33     2 

33  1-15 

B 

,, 

15 

45 

3 

8 

1 

- 

-      1 

28     0 

# 

16-18 

G 

9 

- 

- 

-    - 

0     3 

# 

19 

Epic  An. 

4 

- 

- 

-    - 

0     6 

34  1-15 

An. 

Indra 

36 

- 

5 

2    - 

9     2 

35-38  2 

Lyric  2 

Various  2 

66 

93 

1 

9  12 

4 

5   - 

34     7 

39-41 3 

Mahap.4 

5 
it 

165 

6 

12 

2    - 

44    9 

40  12 

Tr. 

I.-Agni 

4 

- 

- 

1 

2 

-    - 

3     0 

42  1-3 

M 

Varuna 

12 

- 

- 

_ 

1 

-    - 

0     0 

4-6 

An. 

ASvina 

12 

- 

- 

-    - 

4     0 

n 

43,  44 

G 

Agni 

189 

3 

1 

7     2 

64     9 

45 

j» 

Indra 

126 

- 

8 

-    - 

43     4 

A 

46 

Mixed  6 

7 
&gt;  &gt; 

28     88 

24  23 

2 

1 

2     1 

65     3 

N 

47  1-12 

Mahap. 

MVA 

54 

- 

4 

-    - 

17    2 

# 

13-18 

„  (Ep.) 

Charm 

!    24' 

- 

- 

-    - 

0    3 

# 

48 

Tr.8 

Soma 

60| 

1 

- 

9 

5 

1    - 

15     7 

49-54 

BS 

Indra 

84    140  \ 

8 

13 

5 

10 

3     2 

123     8 

55,  56 

G9 

Danastuti 

31 

2 

3 

1    - 

17    7 

57 

Tr. 

Asvina 

16 

- 

- 

1 

1 

1    - 

8     1 

4 

58 

, 

12 

- 

- 

- 

3 

-    - 

1     8 

# 

59i-s 

Cont.  J. 

I.-Varuna 

20 

- 

- 

1 

3 

4   - 

3     2 

# 

6,  7 

Cont.  Tr. 

5J 

8 

- 

- 

1 

1 

-     4 

0     3 

1  34  16-18  Dan.  2»35  Un.  lyric  (see  §242  iv)  to  A§.;  36,  37  (see  Ch.  ix,  App. 

Nos.  73,  61,  71,  70)  to  Indra;  38  G  to  Ind.-Agni.  3  except  40  12.  4  40  2  see 

Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  76.  5  39  Agni;  40  Ind.-Agni;  41  Varuna.  6  see  §  248  iii. 

7  46  25-28  Vayu;  21-24,  29-33  Dan.  8  48  5  J-  9  55  3,  5  An.,  4  Tr.  G;  56  5  P. 


mil  32-103 


2*3 


Mandala  VIII,  continued. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A    B 

C 

D 

£ 

P 

Lingu. 

A 

D.  VIII  60-103  (Various 

small  collections) 

60,61,66i-i4 

BS 

Indra x 

78 

130 

21  20 

7 

3 

1 

1 

96  12 

s 

62 

Pankti2 

j&gt; 

48 

1     1 

- 

1 

12     1 

63  i-n,64, 65 

G 

)&gt; 

108 

2  13 

1 

_ 

41     2 

63  i2 

Tr. 

Devah 

4 

-     1 

- 

1 

_ 

_ 

1     0 

* 

66i5 

Epic  An. 

4 

-    - 

- 

- 

0     2 

67-69 

G3 

Indra 4 

2 

189 

14  19 

8 

1 

72     8 

70,  71  10-15 

BS5 

Ind.,  Agni 

26 

53 

16  15 

2 

2 

- 

_ 

49     3 

s 

71  1-9,  79 

Tr.  G 

Ag.,Soma 

55 

-    - 

- 

- 

22     4 

72-74 

G6 

Various7 

145 

13     8 

3 

- 

45     3 

s 

75-78 

G8 

Indra9 

4 

146 

5     7 

- 

1 

37  12 

80  1-9,  etc.10 

G10 

Various10 

9 

150 

8     9 

1 

_ 

1 

63     4 

10 

Tr. 

Devah 

4 

-     1 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

2     0 

s 

81 

Tr.  G 

Indra 

27 

1    - 

_ 

- 

19    0 

5  &gt; 

86 

J 

As.,  Sav. 

18 

-    - 

1 

- 

1 

- 

6    0 

&gt;&gt; 

88-90 

BS11 

Indra 

25 

51 

4    2 

3 

_ 

3 

1 

50     1 

# 

91 

Epic  An. 

Charm 

30 

1     1 

1 

- 

1     8 

s 

92-94 

G12 

Indra13 

235 

11  16 

- 

- 

102     7 

&gt;&gt; 

95 

An.14 

}» 

32 

1     1 

_ 

_ 

16     1 

&gt;&gt; 

96 

Tr. 

&gt;&gt; 

84 

4     4  10 

8 

- 

1 

29     3 

&gt;&gt; 

97  1-9 

Brh. 

&gt;&gt; 

9 

27 

-    - 

- 

1 

1 

- 

16     1 

10-15 

Irreg.15 

&gt;  &gt; 

16 

8 

4     1 

2 

- 

- 

- 

17     2 

98,  etc.16 

BS16 

11 

36 

83 

11  11 

4 

1 

4 

1 

51     2 

# 

100  1-6 

Tr.1? 

24 

-     1 

2 

1 

1 

2 

0    3 

# 

7-9 

Epic  An. 

12 

-    - 

- 

- 

1     2 

# 

10,  11 

Tr. 

Vac 

8 

-    - 

1 

- 

- 

- 

3    3 

# 

12 

Cont.Tr. 

4 

1 

0     1 

• 

101  14 

Tr. 

Cosmog. 

4 

0     1 

* 

i5&gt;   16 

»&gt; 

Gauh 

8 

-    - 

- 

1 

- 

- 

0    0 

102  1-18 

G 

Agni 

54 

4     2 

1 

- 

17     0 

# 

19—22 

»» 

» » 

12 

1    - 

- 

- 

0     2 

103  1-13 

Mixed18 

17 

32 

10    6 

2 

2 

2 

- 

35    0 

14 

An. 

j&gt; 

4 

-    - 

- 

- 

1    0 

1  60  Agni.         2  62  7-9  Dim.  B  (Dim.  U 
69  1-3,  7-10,  12-15  An.;  n,  16  P;  17,  18  B. 


3  68  16  Tr.  G  ; 
19,  69  17,  18  Dan. 


with  refrain  verse). 

4  67  Adityah;  6814- 

5  70  7-i2  B;  13-15  see  §  245  ii.  6  74  13-15  Au.  '  72  VD.;  73  As.;  74  1-12 

Agni,  13-15  Danastuti.  8  77  10,  n  BS.;  78  10  B.         9  75  Agni.  "  80  1-9,  82 

Ind.;  83  VD. ;  84  Agni;  85  AS.;  87  As.  (BS.).  n  89  5,  6  An.,  7  B.  12  94  2 

Tr.  G.  Vi  94  Marutah.  14  95  7  Tr.  An.,  see  §  94  viii.  15  see  §  224. 

16  98  1-3  Us.,  4-6  Dim.  Us.,' 7-12  Mixed;  99;  101  1-13  VD.  (3  G,  I3  B).        "  100  6  J. 
18  103  1-3  B,  4-7  B.-Sat.,  8-13  Kak.-Sat. 


284 


Table  of  hymns 


Mandala  IX. 


N 


Soma  Pavamana  collection 
Soma  P. 
Apriya 

Soma  P.2 

5 
j&gt; 

6 


Soma  P. 


1-4 

G 

5r-7 

» » 

8-i  i 

Epic  An. 

6-60 

GM 

61-67  30  3 

4 
»» 

62  4-6,  etc.6 

Tr.  G 

67  31.  32 

Epic  An. 

68,  etc.7 

J7 

70,  etc.8 

8 
&gt;&gt; 

80 

.. 

81-86 

9 
» » 

87,  etc.10 

Tr. 

88 

}&gt; 

93,94 

»&gt; 

97 1-33,  52-56 

&gt;&gt; 

34-51.57.58 

&gt;» 

98-101 

An." 

102-106 

Usnih  l2 

107 

BS13 

108 

KS 

109 

Pentad 14  | 

110 

Viraji5 

111 

Atyasti     ; 

112-114 

Ep.An.16 

Tr.     Dim 


113 

21 

16 

1  1035 

3    599 

27 

8 


248 

116 

20 

320 

252 

28 

40 

152 

80 

2 

29 

38 

24 

43 

33 

9 


176 
91 
62 
32 
1 
3 
12 
78 


ABC 


-  3 

-  1 

1  - 

19  22 
8  9 
1     2 

3     5  11 

3  4  25 

8  4  21 
11     5  12 

4  4     5 

9  4     6 

5  3     7 
1-4 

11     8 
5  10     3 
4     4     4 


D    E    F 


1  - 
20  10 
14   - 


1     2 


18  4 
6  2 
5  - 

19  6 


2  2 

1  - 

1  - 

2  1 


Lingu. 


51  4 

1  1 

1  3 

555  20 

329  8 

16  2 

0  4 

127  13 
72  8 
13  2 
187  25 
146  8 
30  1 
35  0 


103 
51 

110 
65 
63 
30 
29 
25  0 
12  1 
7  31 


1  60  3  Pur.  -  58  Dan.  3  exc.  as  in  next  line.  4  67  16-18  Dvipadfi  G, 

30  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  14.         5  67  ia-12  Pusan,  22-24  Agni,  25-27  VD.         6  62  4-6; 
66  16-18;  66  19-21  (Agni).  7  68  Jt.;  69  (2  fin.  st.  Tr.);   72,  73;   74  (8  Tr.); 

75,77,78.  8  70,  71Jt.;  76,  79.  9  81,  82  Jt.;  85  n,  12  Cont.  Tr.  10  87, 

89-92,  95,  96.  »  98  n,  99  1  B;  101  2,  3  G.  12  102,  106  1-3  Dim.  Us. 

13  107  3,  16  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  72.  14  109  22  type  8.4.8.  "  110  1-3 

12. 8.12,  4-9  12.12.12.  16  with  refrain  borrowed  from  106  4b. 


ix  l-x  26 


2  so 


Mandala  X. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

ABC 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

A. 

X  1-9:  Agni  collection 

s 

1,6 

Pentad  &gt; 

Agni 

56 

5-7 

1 

_ 

1 

,    21     1 

c 

2,7,8 

Tr. 

2 

92 

1     1     6 

9 

1 

2 

38     6 

s 

3 

, 

&gt;&gt; 

28 

7-1 

2 

_ 

-        14     0 

c 

4,  5 

» » 

56 

12     2 

11 

1 

1  |   23    5 

- 

9  x-5 

G 

Apah 

15 

-      2 

- 

-41 

# 

6,  7 

»&gt; 

Charm 

6 

-    - 

- 

-  ]       0     2 

# 

8,9 

Epic  An. 

&gt;» 

8 

-    - 

1 

1        0     5 

- 

1  mixed  with  Tristubh 

• 

2  8  7-9  Indra. 

# 

B. 

X  10-19 :  Funeral  col- 
lection 

10 

Tr. 

[Yama] 

56 

2     2     7 

3 

1 

2 

6    28 

11 

J1 

Agni 

36 

1    -    - 

2 

- 

- 

16      4 

s 

12 

Tr. 

Ag.  &amp;  VD 

33 

3     17 

- 

1 

- 

12       6 

13  1-3 

»&gt; 

DP 

12 

111 

1 

- 

1 

4      0 

4 

4 

_    _    _. 

- 

1 

- 

0      3 

5 

j" 

DP 

4 

-    -     2 

- 

- 

1 

0      0 

14  i-is 

,  etc.2 

Cont.Tr.2 

Pitarah2 

243 

5 

6     3     3 

25 

4  19 

14  141 

i3_1 

6,  etc.3 

Epic  An.3 

'  3 

&gt;5 

1 

39 

-     1 

2 

- 

0    22 

19 

4 

Charm 

31 

-    - 

1 

- 

1     14 

1  11  7-9  Tr.      2  14  1-12,  15  Tr.  («  J),  16  i-xo,  18  1-13  (11  Prast.),  funeral  hymns; 

17  1-13  (13  11.8.8.8).  3  14  13-16  (15  Brh.),  16  n-i4  funeral  hymns;  17  14, 

18  14.  419  6G. 


A 


C.    X  20-26 :  Vimada 

20 

Tr.  G1 

Agni 

7 

26 

11- 

1    -    - 

11     0 

21,  24-26 2 

An.2 

Various  2 

124 

8  11 

1    - 

56     2 

22 

Un.  lyric3 

Indra 

17 

43 

18     9     4 

11- 

43     1 

23 

Cont.  J. 

28 

15     2    5 

1     2     1 

19     0 

24  4-6 

Epic  An. 

Cosmog. 

12 

0    3 

1  1  from  25  1 ;  9  Viraj,  10  Tr. 
Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  66 ;  26  Pusan. 


2  21  Ag.,  24  1-3  Ind.,  25  Soma:  for  metre 

3  For  metre  see  §  243 ;  15  Tr. 


286 


Table  of  hymns 

Mandala  X,  continued. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B    C 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

c 

D.  X  27-84 :  various  small 
groups 

# 

27 

Cont.  Tr. 

96 

1 

-     3 

4 

2 

5 

9  30 

# 

28 

Tr. 

48 

_ 

1  - 

_ 

_ 

1 

13  14 

N 

29-32  5 

i 

Various1 

156 

10 

3  10 

14 

1 

1 

76  12 

# 

32  6-9 

,, 

[Agni] 

16 

1 

_    -  1  _ 

- 

- 

2     5 

33 

Mixed2 

7 

23 

_ 

3 

_ 

_ 

11     6 

# 

34 

Tr.3 

[Aksah] 

56 

- 

-      1 

8 

1 

1 

0  33 

35-38 

J4 

Various4 

165 

2 

1  11 

35 

6 

- 

58     7 

39-41 

J5 

Asvina 

124 

5 

1     8 

12 

7 

2 

52     6 

42-446 

Tr.,  J« 

Indra 

104 

1 

1     1 

10 

2 

1 

40     9 

# 

42  9-n 

Tr. 

12 

- 

-     1 

- 

- 

- 

1     6 

45,47 

Tr. 

Ag.,Indra 

75 

2 

1     3 

11 

1 

0 

25     3 

46 

Pentad? 

Agni 

40 

- 

-     4 

3 

- 

1 

27     1 

A 

48-50 

J8 

[Indra] 

116 

36 

6  18 

15 

3 

1 

81     6 

# 

51-53 

Cont.Tr. 

[Agni] 

104 

4 

1     3 

23 

4  10 

10  35 

54-56  3 

Tr. 

Indra9 

68 

1 

1     3 

15 

_ 

_ 

11  12 

• 

56  4-7 

Jt. 

16 

1 

1     1 

- 

1 

- 

1     7 

• 

57 

G 

Charm 

18 

1 

_ 

_ 

_. 

1     2 

# 

58 

Epic  An. 

ii 

21 

- 

- 

1 

- 

0     7 

# 

59  i-7 

Cont.  Tr. 

ii 

27 

1 

-     4 

1 

2 

2 

6  11 

# 

8-io 

Ma.(E.)10 

DP 

17 

2 

- 

- 

- 

0     2 

# 

60  i-6 

G 

19 

_ 

_ 

1 

- 

2     0 

# 

7-12 

Epic  An.11 

Charm 

27 

- 

1 

- 

3 

0     7 

A 

61 

Tr. 

108 

25 

3  32 

4 

_ 

2 

76    7 

62 

Mixed12 

22 

20 

1 

2     3 

2 

11 

- 

10     7 

63,  64 

Cont.  J,  J13 

VD 

132 

2 

1     7 

12 

8 

- 

44     6 

65,  66 

Jt.,Cont.J 

VD 

116 

7 

3     1 

19 

6 

1 

31     6 

67,  68 

Tr. 

I.-Brhasp. 

96 

3 

-     6 

12 

2 

1 

23  14 

69,  70 

14 

Agni15 

92 

1 

1     6 

23 

5 

- 

23    8 

# 

71 

Cont.Tr. 

[Jnana] 

44 

_ 

_    _ 

5 

•1 

5 

0  17 

# 

72 

Epic  An. 

Cosmog. 

36 

- 

- 

1 

2 

0  15 

A 

73,  74 

Tr. 

Indra 

68 

9 

4  18 

1 

1 

- 

37    9 

n 

75,76 

Cont.  J,  J 

Various16 

68 

4 

2     5 

2 

5 

- 

26     5 

S 

77  i-s,  78  i-6 

Bhargavl 

Marutah 

44 

1 

-      2 

4 

_ 

_ 

59     5 

&gt;&gt; 

77  6-8,  78  7,  8 

Tr.,  Jt. 

„ 

20 

3 

-     5 

2 

- 

- 

15     1 

79,  80 

Tr. 

Agni 

56 

7 

2     4 

10 

- 

- 

15     S 

# 

81,  82 

Cont.Tr. 

Cosmog. 

55 

1 

- 

-     2 

6 

0 

9 

6  24 

# 

83,  84 

Cont.Tr. 

[Manyu] 

56 

2 

2    4 

6 

7 

- 

3  17 

1  29  I.,  30  Apah,  31  VD.,  32  i-5  I.  (J).  2  i  Tr.,  2)  3  BS.,  4-9  G.  3  34  7  J. 

4  3,5,   36  VD.  (2  fin.  st.  Tr.) ;    37  i-io  Surya  (Jt.)  «,  12  Devah  (J);   38  Indra. 

5  39  Jt.  6  42  1-8  Tr.,  43  J,  44  1-3  Tr.,  4-9  J.  t  mixed  with  Tristubh. 
8  48  7,  10,  11  Tr. ;  49  Jt.  9  56  1  -3  Lament.  w  59  8  Pankti.  «  60  8,  9  P. 
12  62  1-4,  11  Cont.  J,  5,  8,  9  An.,  6,  7  B.-Sat.,  10  G.          13  63  2  fin.  st.  Tr.;  64  12  and 


fin.  st.  Tr.  14  69  1,  2  J. 


70  Apriya.  16  75  Sindhavah,  76  Gravanah. 


x  27-114 


287 


M and ALA  X,  continued. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

% 

E.    X  85-114:  Sing 

le  hymns 

85 

(Cont.Tr. 

[Marriage] 

53 

2 

- 

1 

7 

1 

5 

3  24 

/Epic  An. 

136 

1 

- 

ia 

4 

6  65 

86 

P.  (Epic) 

[Vrsakapi] 

95 

1 

- 

7 

3 

9  19 

87  i-2i 

Tr. 

A.  Kaks. 

84 

1 

1 

- 

17 

4 

3 

4  77 

22-25 

An. 

Charm 

16 

- 

- 

1 

3 

5     7 

88 

Tr. 

Agni 

76 

3 

1 

1 

11 

2 

3 

5  19 

N 

89 

5  J 

Indra 

68 

- 

2 

5 

11 

- 

1 

30    9 

90  1-15 

Epic  An. 

Cosmog. 

60 

3 

1 

1 

3 

0  60 

16 

Tr. 

Devah 

4 

- 

- 

- 

1 

- 

- 

1     0 

N 

91,  92 

Jt.,  J 

Agni,'VD 

120 

1 

- 

10 

6 

2 

- 

42  12 

A 

93 

Un.  lyric1 

VD 

22 

38 

20 

14 

5 

2 

4 

1 

44     2 

94 

Cont.  J 

Gravanah 

56 

!  4 

2 

6 

3 

1 

1 

9  17 

95 

Cont.  Tr. 

[Urvasi] 

71 

12 

4 

8 

5 

1 

6 

25  24 

C 

96 

J2 

Harayah 

52 

1 

1 

2 

2 

- 

2 

39     1 

97 

Epic  An. 

Osadhlh 

92 

2 

2 

4 

- 

1  61 

98 

Cont.  Tr. 

Charm 

48 

3 

- 

- 

6 

1 

6 

1     5 

A 

99 

Tr. 

Indra 

48 

9 

4 

9 

4 

- 

2 

43     3 

C 

100 

Jt. 

VD 

40 

j  - 

- 

- 

- 

1 

- 

15    2 

101-103 

Cont.Tr.3 

Various4 

123 

22 

i  5 

8 

2 

16 

1 

12 

14  42 

N 

104 

Tr. 

Indra 

41 

- 

_ 

•2 

3 

_ 

_ 

29     1 

A 

105 

Un.  lyric5 

&gt;&gt; 

23 

12 

20 

5 

8 

4 

- 

- 

20    2 

C 

106,  110-113 

Tr.6 

7 

208 

7 

2 

5 

36  29 

2 

55  18 

107-109,  114 

Cont.Tr.8 

148 

8 

!    4 

2 

1 

27 

- 

15 

9  57 

1  see  §  242  v. 
103  13  Epic  An. 


113  Jt.  7  106  As.,  110  Apriya. 


2  96  11-X3  Tr.  3  101  4,  6  G,  5  B;  102  1,  3,  12  B; 

4  103  i-ii  Indra,  12  Apua,  13  Charm.  5  see  §  244  iii. 

8  107  Tr.  (4  J);  108  Tr.;  109  6,  7  Epic  An. 


288 


Table  of  hymns,  x  115-191 


Mandala  X,  continued. 


Tr. 

Dim. 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

Lingu. 

# 

F.    X  115-191 :  Single 

hymns,  continued 

A 

115 

Cont.  J » 

Agni 

37 

8 

3 

18 

2 

2 

_ 

32      0 

C 

116,  122, 123 

Tr.2 

Various  2 

100 

3 

4 

8 

11 

6 

5 

53       7 

117,  etc.3 

Cont.  Tr. 

160 

3 

2 

5 

16 

5  20 

5     75 

C 

118,  etc.4 

G 

Various  4 

87 

1 

3 

3 

1 

20       7 

119,  etc.5 

&gt;» 

5 

104 

7 

8 

3 

1 

5     22 

120,  121 

Tr. 

Indra  6 

70 

7 

6 

9 

3 

- 

5 

10     22 

124  1-5 

&gt;j 

[I.-Agni] 

20 

- 

- 

1 

1 

1 

1 

0       4 

N 

6-8 

7 

[Vrtra] 

12 

- 

1 

2 

- 

- 

- 

5       0 

9 

&gt;&gt; 

[Hamsa] 

4 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1 

„ 

0      0 

A 

126  1-7 

Upar.8 

MVA 

1 

27 

2 

6 

1 

- 

3      0 

N 

8 

Tr. 

Agni 

4 

- 

1 

1 

- 

- 

- 

2       2 

131 

9 

Indra 

24 

4 

_ 

_ 

_ 

2 

1 

_ 

9       2 

A 

132 

Un.  lyric10 

MV 

17 

11 

4 

3 

6 

2 

1 

- 

17      4 

S 

133,  134 

Mahap.11 

Indra  n 

4 

68 

3 

6 

1 

- 

- 

- 

19      2 

135,  etc.12 

Ep.  An.13 

8 

410 

2 

4 

1 

2 

12 

12 

7  245 

c 

138 

J 

Indra 

24 

- 

- 

1 

- 

4 

- 

14      4 

139,  etc.14 

Cont.Tr.14 

Various 14 

243        9 

13 

2 

6 

19 

6  18 

29  102 

s 

140, 150, 172 

Lyric  15 

Agni 16 

26     26 

2 

2 

4 

4 

- 

1 

23      0 

141 

An. 

VD 

1    24 

— 

2 

1 

1 

3       3 

A 

143 

An. 

Asvina 

24 

1 

3 

- 

_ 

15      0 

144 

Mixed17 

Indra 

6 

14 

3 

5 

1 

1 

- 

- 

12      0 

N 

147,  160 

Jt.,  Tr. 

&gt;  &gt; 

-in 

2 

2 

1 

4 

- 

- 

25       2 

A 

148 

Tr. 

5, 

20 

8 

2 

2 

3 

1 

0 

18      0 

C 

176 

An.18 

Agni 19 

15 

1 

2 

- 

- 

9       1 

178 

Tr. 

TSrksya 

12 

- 

- 

1 

4 

1 

- 

4      0 

S 

185 

Tr.  G 

MVA' 

9 

2 

1 

- 

- 

1       0 

1  115,  2  fin.  st.  Tr.  2  116  Ind.,  122  Agni  (Cont.  J),  123  Vena.  3  117; 

125;  128-130.  4  118  A.  Raks.;  127  Urmya;  156  Agni;  171  Indra;  188  A.  Jat. 

5  119,  153  Indra;  158  Surya-Savitar ;  175  Gravanah  (i  Tr.  G);  186  Vata;  187 
Agni;   189.  6  121  Prajapati.  "'  124  7  J.  8  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  54. 

9  131  4  An.  10  see  §  242  vi.  »  133  i-3,  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  76 ;  7  Tr. ; 

134  7  P  (Devah).  12  135-137;  142  7,  8;  145,  146;  151;  152  (Ind.)  An.;  154, 

155;  159;  162,'l63;  164;  166;  173,  174;  184;  190,  191.  13  164  3,  191  3  Tr. 

14  139  1-3  Siirya;  139  4-6;  142  i-6  Agni;  149  Sav.;  157  VD  (Dvip.  Tr.,  i  11.  8); 
161  Charm  (5  Epic  An.);  165  Kapota;  167  Indra  (J);  168  Vata;  169  Osadhlh; 
170  Vibhrat  (J :  4  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  27);  177  Patarhga;  179  Indra  (i  Epic  An.); 
180  Indra;  181;  182  Agni  and  Brhaspati;  183  Charm.  15  140  3-5  Sat.;  150 

1-3  Br.:  for  the  other  stanzas  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  Nos.  6  (172  3),  8  (172  1,  2,  4), 
31  (140  1,  2),  47  (140  6,  150  4,  5).  16  172  Usas.  17  144  1,  3,  4  G,  2  B, 

5  No.  47  as  above,  6  No.  31.  18  176  2  G.  19  176  1  Rbhavah. 


Hymns  in  this  section  for  which  no  deity  is  named  are  for  the  most  part  either 
charms  or  philor  jphical  poems. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

METEICAL  COMMENTAEY. 
267.    Introductory  Notes. 

The  Metrical  Commentary  does  not  form  a  complete  record  of  the 
restorations  required  in  the  Samhita  text,  and  only  notices  those 
metrical  irregularities  which  are  very  exceptional. 

In  particular,  the  following  restorations  are  very  commonly  required 
in  addition  to  those  mentioned  in  the  Commentary  : 

Hiatus,  whether  regular,  as  after  -i,  -I,  -u,  -u,  or  exceptional,  as 
after  -a,  -a. 

Combination  of  final  -a,  -a  with  initial  r  (text  -a  r-). 

Syllabic  restoration  :  (i)  of  i  u  for  y  v  followed  by  the  grave  accent : 
(ii)  of  i  for  y  in  the  instr.  sing,  -yd  and  the  dual  form  -yoh  after 
heavy  syllables  ;  in  the  suffixes  -ya  -yd  after  heavy  syllables  ;  in  the 
words  guhya,  jdnya,  tyd,  dadhydnc,  divyd,  ndrya,  pratydnc,  mddya, 
yiijya,  sakhyd,  syd  and  some  others  :  in  the  optatives  asydm  and  sydm ; 
and  in  the  suffixes  -bhyah,  -bhyam  after  heavy  syllables  at  the  end  of 
the  verse  :  (iii)  of  u  for  v  in  tvdm,  tvdm,  tvd,  tva,  svd  and  in  the  instr. 
sing.  fern,  in  -vd  :  (iv)  of  aa  for  a  in  the  gen.  pi.  -dm  at  the  end  of  the 
verse  :  (v)  of  -an  for  n  in  the  declension  of  nouns  in  -an,  -man,  -van : 
and  (vi)  of  ar  for  r  in  the  dual  forms  pitrbh,  matroh,  svasroh. 

Quantitative  restoration:  (i)  in  the  words  correctly  written  dcchd, 
evd,  nfndm,  pavdkd,  mfl  (mflaya-,  mfllkd,  sumfUkd)  :  (ii)  in  final 
vowels  in  positions  which  are  metrically  unimportant,  as  in  the  third 
and  fifth  syllables  of  trimeter  verse,  before  consonant  groups,  and  at 
the  end  of  the  verse:  (iii)  of  cch  for  ch  in  Aufrecht's  text:  (iv)  of  c  for 
sc  in  compounds  as  puru-candrd,  su-candrd:  (v)  of  n  for  nn  in  the 
locative  and  vocative  singular. 

Where  the  text  gives  a  correct  reading  this  is  not  usually  noted  in 
the  Commentary,  even  though  restoration  is  required  by  the  ordinary 
rules;  as  when  the  suffix  -ya  has  monosyllabic  value  after  a  heavy 
syllable. 

Emendations  suggested  in  the  Commentary  are  not  intended  as 
definitive  proposals,  but  only  as  indications  of  the  general  require- 
ments of  the  metre  in  accordance  with  the  period  to  which  the  hymn 
is  assigned. 

19 


290  Metrical  Commentary 

The  following  slight  corrections  are  needed  in  Aufrecht's  text  of 
the  Rigveda  (2nd  edition,  Bonn  1877) :  ix  47  2b  dasyutdrhand,  86  35c 
mddhvd;  x  4  5d  pra?idyanta,  6  2a  bhdniibhir,  8  3c  dsvabudhnd,  51  lc 
bahud/td,   106  2d  mahishevdvaptindt,    143  3a  daiisishtJidv. 

References  are  given  throughout  the  Commentary  to  the  sections 
of  this  book  in  which  the  points  raised  have  already  been  discussed, 
except  as  regards  some  of  the  more  common  restorations,  for  which 
the  references  are  given  in  the  Index. 


268.     Metrical  Commentary. 

Mandala  I. 

A.  I  1-11.  [Dimeter  hymns  of  the  normal  or  strophic  period, 
irregularly  arranged.  10  is  addressed  to  Indra  of  the  Kusika  family, 
and  the  metre  corresponds  fairly  with  that  of  the  dimeter  hymns  of 
Mandala  III." 


8,  9  perhaps  in  Trochaic  Gayatri 


8d  asmdbhya. 


B.  I  12-23.  [Gayatri  hymns  of  a  very  regular  type,  not  earlier 
than  the.  normal  period.      Kanvdh  14  2a.] 

12.  5b  smd.  14.  3a  indrd- ;  3b  either  miirdm  aynim  with  irregular 
Sandhi  (§130  iv)  as  in  Latin,  or  mitrfigiti  as  a  compound.  15.  6b 
initra  vdruria  §  174  ii  ;  6c  dsathe  ;  12a  santia:  the  statement  in  §  137 
is  to  be  deleted.  17.  3b  and  elsewhere  indra  vdruna,  see  §174  ii. 
18.  la  correction  is  needed,  e.g.  to  sbmdnaam  suarnaram  or 
somavrfham  su-dvasam.  20.  3a  probably  ntisatidbhidm.  22.  19c 
yujia.  23.  2b,  3a  indrd-;  15a  utd ;  *18c  kdrtuam;  *19a  probably 
non-metrical,  cf.   vii  66   16a;    *21c  jiok. 

C.  I  24-30.  [Dimeter  hymns  of  the  strophic  period.  Later 
additions  appear  both  at  the  beginning  and  towards  the  end  of  the 

series.] 

*24.  For  the  date  see  §88;  12c  dhuat;  12d  sd;  13a  dhuat;  15c 
perhaps  aaditya,  §  150:  extended  Tristubh  verse,  or  read  te  for  tdva. 

25.  6a  dmte;  12a  visvdha.  26.  la  vdsisva;  9b  see  §152  ii.  27. 
3c  pdhi.  28.  6a  smd;  7c  hdrlva  with  Sandhi.  30.  4a  u;  14a  ghd 
tutivdn;   17a  dsva valid;  21b  a  dntdd :  perhaps  pardkdat,  §  151  i. 

D.  I  31-35.  [Trimeter  hymns  of  the  cretic  period  :  but  33  in 
its  metrical  character  is  of  the  strophic  or  normal  period.] 

31.  18d  sumati,  §  139  iii.  33.  9a  a  'double  rest'  (§  226  iv)  is 
hardly  probable  in  this  hymn  :  perhaps  add  tvdm  at  the  end  of  the 
verse.      14a,    14c  Viratsthana  verses;    14a  perhaps  ydsmi;    15c  jiok. 


i  1-61  291 

34.  lc  himid;  4b  trayidhd ;  7c  rat  hid ;  9d  naasatyd.  35.  6b,  see 
§178;  8b  dhdnud,  §147;  triui  dhdnvd  would  be  more  regular.  9d 
the  hybrid  Tristubh  verse  invites  correction,  as  by  reading  d  for 
abhi. 

EF.  I  36-50.  [Two  typical  Kanva  collections  :  but  both  from 
the  form  and  the  contents  a  still  earlier  date  is  suggested  for  the 
first  hymn.] 

36.  lc  perhaps  read  vdcobhir  Imahe  su-uktaih,  as  a  Vasisthi  verse; 
4c  sd  ;  8c  Bhargavl  verse  :  perhaps  read  vfsd  kdnva  abhuvat ;  10c,  11a 
medhidtithih  or  medhya-atithih  1  1 2a  perhaps  needs  correction ;  1 2c 
srutia  ;    15a  pdhi;    17c,  see  §152  ii. 

37.  13a  ydanti;  14c  tdtra  su\  15c  dyu.  38.  2c  kd,  §151  iii; 
3c  kua,  ib. ;  4b  mdrtidsah,  ib.  ;  6a  md  u  su.  39.  3c  perhaps  needs 
correction;  5c  prd ;  6a  upa ;  6c  perhaps  asruvat.  40.  lb  tud ;  6a 
vocema;  7c  ddsudn;  8d  nd  'not'  with  hiatus,  which  is  rare.  41. 
7b  probably  -asya  with  hiatus,  though  the  reading  -driamndh  is 
metrically  more  convenient.  42.  2c  smd ;  6b  vdsi-,  see  §  168  ii.  43. 
4a  gdthd-,  §166  ii;  6c  ndribhiah,  §170  iii.  44.  6c  dyu.  45.  lb 
dditidn  ;  5d  &lt;wa  ;  10b  ydksvd.  46.  la,  es-d ;  2c  perhaps  vasu-i  §  166  iv  ; 
6c  rdsathdm;  10a  6/«f  ?/&gt;  for  bhdh:  the  repetition  of  the  particle  w  is 
impossible;  13c  sambhu  is  probable,  §  174  ic.  47.  9a  ndsatid.  48. 
Id  dadsvatl;  3a  ucchdt,  though  against  the  metre  ;  3c  asidh  is  doubtful, 
being  against  the  rhythm ;  4a  Bhargavl  verse,  requiring  correction : 
perhaps  prd  ye  tdva  ;  4d  ndmd  plural;  9  c  asmdbhya;  lOd  srudhi ;  11a 
vdmsud ;  12a  vahd ;  16b  mimiksvd.  *50.  13c  mdhyam,  not  mdhya : 
for  the  rhythm  cf.   10c. 

G.  I  51-57.  [Of  these  hymns  51-54  are  metrically  akin  to  the 
Kutsa  series  i  94-115 :  55-57  to  the  Gotama  series  i  74-93.] 

51.  2b  avrta  :  d-  may  be  the  negative  particle,  §167  iv  ;  6d  evd; 
8c  bhava ;  14b  duria.  52.  7c  yujia.  53.  2c  pradivo  'kdma- ;  5c 
prdmaM,  §  139  iii;  5d  dsvavatyd,  §  168  ii ;  7c  sakhid;  9a  duih ;  10a 
perhaps  SCT  for  utibhih.  54.  llb^awa^a^,  §166  vie;  lid  su-apatyai. 
56.    2a  nemanisah  ;  4a  yatR     57.    4b  ardbhyd. 

H.  I  58-64.  [The  Gotama  Nodhas  hymns  appear  to  be  as  early 
as  any  in  the  Rigveda  :  the  refrain  marks  out  i  59  as  a  later  addition, 
and  connects  viii  80  and  ix  93  :  see  §  106  i.  For  the  peculiar  metre  of 
i  61  see  §  250  iii.] 

58.  2b,  4c  trsu,  §§  160  i,  173  iii;  5d  cdratah,  cf.  i  146  lc;  6a  tud; 
8d  Viratsthana  verse.  59.  4a  requires  correction,  the  metre  being  in 
disorder  and  the  verb  wanting  :  probably  brhativa  with  Sandhi ;  7a 
mahind,  §  178.       60.     lb  Viratsthana  verse. 

61.  2  b  the  verse  is  disordered,  the  true  type  being  found  in  3b: 
bddhe  cannot  stand  ;  8a  probably  Viratsthana  verse ;  1 0a  evd ;  1 0c 
gdah,  §  142  ii ;  11a  Jagati  cadence  :  perhaps  dpah  should  be  restored  ; 
lid  Viratsthana  verse;  12c  gdvah,  §  142  ii ;  15b  Gautami  verse  rather 
than  Pentad  :  perhaps  imnah ;  15c  probably  surye  (Viratsthana  verse)  ; 
16a  hariyojana,  §  175  i,  cf.  i  62  13b. 

19—2 


292  Metrical  Commentary 

62.  3a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  ;  5c  bhumydh  ;  8c  Pentad  verse,  but 
possibly  Gautami;  12a  evd.  63.  4a  irregular  cadence,  §220  v;  5b 
perhaps  mdrtidndm,  §  151  iii  ;  5c  kasthaah,  §  142  i  ;  7c  perhaps  sudadse, 
§  142  v;  8c  asmdbhya  ;  8d  visvddhd.  64.  9a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  ; 
15a  nu  it,  §  124. 

K.  I  65-73.  [The  Pentad  hymns  65-70  shew  a  very  regular 
rhythm,  and  cannot  be  earlier  than  the  strophic  period.  The  text  is 
rather  imperfect,  and  needs  correction  where  it  conflicts  with  the 
standard  metre.  Hymns  71-73  are  in  very  regular  Tristubh,  probably 
of  the  normal  period.] 

65.  9a  perhaps  svdslti,  §  178  ;  10b  the  long  9th  syllable  marks  the 
full  developement  of  this  metre,  §  249  ii.  66.  9a  cardthd  requires 
correction,  §  178.  67.  2b  read  havirvdt,  cf.  i  72  7d;  5a  ksdam, 
prthvim;  5b  dydam ;  9b  Tristubh  verse;  10b  sammayd,  cf.  §  158  iii: 
at  least  there  is  no  other  example  of  a  gerund  in  -ya  in  the  Rigveda 
proper.  68.  2d  Viratsthana  verse  :  or  read  devdndm  devdh  ;  4b  perhaps 
dmartam,  cf.  v.  33  6b.  69.  8a  probably  read  ydd  dhdn ;  8b  viver 
dpdihsi,  cf.  vi  31  3d.  70.  3b  cdratdm,  cf.  §178;  4d  'mrtdh;  5b  su- 
uktaih ;  7b  cdratah,  cf.  i  58  5d  ;  10a  read  purutrd  ndrah;  10b 
perhaps  read  vedo  vi  babhruh,  cf.   iii   1    10a. 

71.  2a  vilu  plural;  4b  Viratsthana  verse;  4c  sdhyase,  §  151  iii; 
9b  perhaps  suura  or  su?-ia,  more  probably  Viratsthana  verse  :  see 
§  151  i.  72.  8d  yena  nu.  73.  lc  siona-,  prindndh;  6b  sumddudhnih, 
§151  iii ;  8a  mdrtidn,  ib.  ;  9b  vanuyama,  tuotdh  rather  than  tvd-utdh. 

L.  I  74-93.  [Gotama  collection :  the  hymns  appear  to  be 
generally  of  the  strophic  period,  80-82,  91-93  being  perhaps  later. 
The  collection  is  characterized  by  the  comparative  frequency  of  Jagati 
and  Pankti  verse.     See  §  106  ii.] 

74.  8c  asthaat.  76.  Id  Rest  at  the  fifth  place:  dasema,  §  178; 
2b,  3a  su ;  3c  vahd.  77.  2c  mdrtidya,  giving  Viratsthana  verse ;  2d 
ca,  §175  ii;  3a  mdria,  §  151  ii ;  3b  Viratsthana  verse;  4a  nfndam; 
5a  evd,  cf.  evdm  v  6  10a  ;  5b  Gautami  verse.  79.  lc  Rest  at  the  fifth 
place;  5c  asmdbhya.  80.  3a  prehi,  §  173  i;  7b  vajri,  §178;  15a 
iiahi  nu;  16b  dadhidn,  81.  6c  asmdbhya ;  7c  grbhdyd.  82.  la  upa 
su ;  srnuhi  as  in  text ;  3a  tud.  83.  4b  sdmid ;  6b  Bhargavi  verse, 
needing  correction.  84.  6a  tudt ;  6c  tud;  lib  srinanti ;  *16-18,  see 
§  88  ;  *18b  yajdtai  is  a  very  late  form  ;  20b  cand,  §  175  ii.  85.  5c 
siauti;  7b  d  nakam  ;  9c  ndri'  dpamsi ;  lOd  rdnia ;  12a  sdrmd ;  12d 
dliatta.  86.  9b  kartd.  87.  2a  dcidhuam,  §  151  ii;  4b  avrtah,  see  on  i 
51  2b  ;  6c  vdsimantah,  see  §  168  ii. 

88.  For  the  metre,  see  §  244  i;  lb  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224; 
Id  verse  with  double  Rest,  §  226  iv  a;  2c  requires  emendation,  but  see 
§  226  iv  b  ;  3c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place.  89.  4b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  : 
diauh ;  6a  suasti ;  6a,  6b  Viratsthana  verses  ;  6c  probably  tarksio  Wista- ; 
9a  nu  ;  9b  ydtra  ;  9d  dyu. 

90.  2d  visvdhd;  *9  cf.  *vii  35.  91.  11a  tud ;  16-18  form  one 
hymn,  as  indicated  by  the  use  of  the  verb  d  pyd  in  each  stanza ;  23b 
sahdvan.   §151    iii.      92.    3d  dhd  ;    4d   avar,   §  169   vi;    7a  bhadsvatl, 


i  62-120  298 

netari;   14c  vi  uccha ;  *93  1-3  :  for  the  metre  see  note  on  p.  167  :  for 
the  date  see  §  88. 

M.  I  94-115.  [This  collection  stands  alone  in  the  Rigveda  for 
the  frequency  of  the  cretic  break:  but  111  does  not  share  this 
peculiarity.  105  is  of  the  same  type  as  i  24,  and  presupposes  a 
dramatic  setting :  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  fragments  are  of 
earlier  date.] 

94.  6c  drtvijyd  :  rtviyd  is  a  probable  correction  :  12c  sd.  95.  4a 
ni/iid,  §  151  ii.     *97.    8a  sindhum  'va. 

100.  lb  prthividh;  5a  rudard,  §  149  ii ;  5b  catalectic  Bhargavi 
verse,  §  227  iii  b,  probably  to  be  corrected  :  see  also  §  169  iii ;  6b  seems 
to  require  correction;  8c  sd:  irregular  cadence;  16b  Rest  at  the  fifth 
place,  or  read  raydye,  §  139  i  :  rjardsuasya,  §  151  ii;  17c  rjrdsuah, 
§  145  ii&amp;;    18b  sdrud;    19a  vis'vdhd. 

102.     3d  tvdyddbhiah ;  7d  ddha.     103.    5b  dhattand ;  5c,  5d  sd. 

104.  lb  Pentad  verse ;  lc  avasdya :  final  -d  shortened  before 
following  vowel ;  2a  probably  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type) ;  2c 
ddasasya,  §  151  i ;  4c  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  5b  nd  'as '  combined, 
§  122  ;  6a  sd  ;  6b  bhajd  ;  8a  as  2a  ;  9a  tud  ;  9d  srnuhi. 

105.  2a  vd  u,  §  171  v  (to  be  added);  2d  pariddyd ;  5a  hepta- 
syllabic  verse;  7a  sd;  7c  vianti;  9b  tdtra ;  15d  ndvia ;  16a  Epic 
semi-cadence;  18c  nicdyid.  106.  2b  bhutd.  108.  4b  u;  id  a  with 
hiatus.  109.  2b  sidldt;  5b  susrava,  §  158  i.  110.  2d  dgacchatd; 
6a  Tristubh  cadence,  cf.  7a ;  9b  hybrid  verse,  unless  we  read  indrar- 
bhumdn. 

111.  3a  taksatd.  112.  10b  Bhargavi  verse,  probably  needing 
correction,  as  to  djd  d,  cf.  17b  ;  19b  ghd.  113.  2a  svetid;  4a  bhadsvati, 
netari ;  13b  avah ;  16a  irdhuam;  17c  uccha;  19d  janayd.  114.  2c 
dyaje,  §178;  3b  mldhicah  ;  4a  rudardm,  §  149  ii;  5d  asmdbhya;  6b, 
8c  as  4a;    lib  irregular  break.     115.    2c  ydtra. 

N.  I  116-126.  [These  hymns  are  very  slightly  connected  by 
references  to  the  Pajra  family,  and  differ  greatly  in  metre  ;  see  §  105  v. 
The  first  two  hymns,  and  to  a  slighter  extent  118  and  119  stand  alone 
in  the  Rigveda  in  the  regular  use  of  iambic  and  cretic  variations  at 
the  break  side  by  side  :  see  §  110  iv.  The  remaining  hymns  correspond 
generally  to  the  types  of  the  periods  to  which  they  are  respectively 
assigned  in  the  'Table  of  hymns.'] 

116.  2c  naasatyd  here  and  frequently,  the  final  vowel  being  often 
combined  by  Sandhi  with  the  initial  vowel  of  a  word  following;  6b 
aghdsua  §  145  ii  b ;  10c  dyu;  14c  utd;  16b  rjrdsua.  117.  lb  lc 
Viratsthana  verses ;  2d  asmdbhya ;  4c  long  ninth  syllable,  easily  cor- 
rected by  interchanging  rinlthah  and  ddmsobhih ;  14d  rjarebhih, 
§  151  ii;  18c  rjrdsua;  22c  catalectic  Bhargavi  verse:  correction  is 
probably  required  ;  23d  srutia.  118.  7a  Sandhi  at  caesura,  §  214  iii. 
119.     lb  jlrdsua,  §  145  ii  b. 

120.  Both  the  text  and  the  metre  of  stanzas  1-9  require 
emendation  on  a  large  scale  :  see  §  244  ii.  *10-12.  The  most  modern 
passage  in  the  Rigveda,  recording  the  poet's  gratitude  for  the  gift  of  a 


294  Metrical  Commentary 

motor-car  (rdtha  anasvd)  :    the  extreme  regularity  of  the  metre  is  in 
striking  contrast  to  the  preceding  stanzas  :  see  also  ^88. 

121.  la  pdtaram  is  possible,  §  149  iii ;  5c  probably  Viratsthana 
verse,  but  see  §  149  iv ;  6c  the  same;  7a  su-idhmd ;  7d  pasu-ise',  8a 
hdrlhd,  dual  with  Sandhi,  §  128  ii;  8c  irregular  cadence;  8d  vaatdpyam, 
§  151  i;    13c  prdsyd  (gerund);    15a  probably  ddsit,  §  178;   15c  bhajd. 

122.  la  pdantam,  §  142  iii  a;  3a  catalectic  Bhargavl  verse, 
§  227  iii  b ;  3b  probably  apdaiu ;  4c  the  same ;  4d  Viratsthana  verse ; 
5c  the  verse  may  be  completed  by  interpreting  dm  as  an  abbreviation 
for  d  voceya ;  6c  Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  6d  supply  srotu  nah  at 
the  beginning  of  the  verse;  8c  pajrebhiah  probably;  8d  mdhya ; 
9d  hotardbhih  is  possible,  §  149  iii;  10b  nardam:  irregular  cadence; 
lOd  perhaps  suurah,  §  151  i;  11a  irregular  cadence;  12a  Viratsthana 
verse;  12c  irregular  cadence;  13c  istd-asva  or  istdma,  cf.  §  145  ii&amp;; 
15c  irregular  cadence;    15d  suurah,  §  151  i. 

123.  8a  adyd;  12d  nd mud ;  13c  adyd.  124.  4a  upa;  5c  u ; 
8a  jydyasyai  has  probably  replaced  an  older  form  jydyase  which  served 
also  as  the  feminine  :  cf .  durvdsase  vii  1  1 9a ;  8b  -cdksia ;  1 0c  ucchd  ; 
13a  dstodhuam.  125.  3a  adyd ;  3c  pdyayd  ;  3d  vardhayd.  126.  4b 
srdyinim;  *6a  hypersyllabic  dimeter  verse;  6c  mdhyam,  cf.  *i  50  13c. 

O.  I  127-139.  [These  hymns,  outwardly  similar,  are  very 
different  in  their  internal  structure.  127  and  129  are  of  very  archaic 
character:  on  the  other  hand  136-139  are  very  regular.  The  later 
hymns  are  also  marked  by  metres  in  which  the  dimeter  verses  greatly 
preponderate,  and  by  occasional  Brhati  and  Tristubh  verses.  The 
authorship  is  not  known.     See  further  §  201  ii.] 

127.  See  §  242  i ;  la  ddsuantam,  catalectic  verse  ;  If  hypersyllabic 
opening,  which  requires  correction,  §  217  :  perhaps  bhrajdm  for 
viblirdstim,  cf.  ix  98  3d  ;  2b  jydyisthani :  caesura  after  third  syllable  ; 
2d  dydam ;  3b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place ;  3e  vdnam  'va ;  4b  ardnl  as 
plural  is  probable,  see  §  219;  5e  vllji,  mrina  plural;  6c  d  art-; 
6g,  6h  pdnthaam ;  7a  extended  Viratsthana  verse ;  8b  sdrvdsaam ; 
9a,  10a  as  3b;  lOd  catalectic  verse;  He  probably  catalectic  verse. 
128.  2g  bhadr,  §  151  i;  5e  vdsunaam ;  7f,  7g  catalectic  verses; 
8a  vdsudhiti  probably,  §  166  iv. 

129.  See  §  242  i;  la  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type) ;  If  omit 
anavadya  and  read  as  Viratsthana  verse ;  2a  s'rudhi ;  3d  tilbhya  ; 
4b  visvd-dyum ;  5a  nama;  5d  ndyisi,  §  142  iii  b;  5f,  5g  catalectic 
verses;  6a  bhavia,  §  151  ii;  6d  sd;  7a  Viratsthana  verse  rather  than 
hotarayd;  7e  d  %m;  8a  prd-pra,  §  175  ii :  catalectic  verse;  8d,  8e 
probably  catalectic  verses ;  8f  a  trimeter  verse  should  be  restored ; 
9a  perhaps  rayina,  §  139  i;  9b  ydhi ;  9f  Bhargavi  yerse,  probably 
requiring  emendation,  §  227  ii  b ;  10a  perhaps  rayina ;  11a  pdhi,  verse 
with  double  Rest,  £  226  iv  a  ;   llg  read  tud  and  omit  jijanat,  §  152  i. 

130.  Id  tud  ;  2a  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type):  svandm,  %  140  iii ; 
3b  vaydh,  §  151  i;  4b,  4c  siat ;  4d  vividnd  ;  6a  vasuydntah,  §  168  iii; 
10c  Pentad  verse,  §  227  i  b;  lOd  probably  dhabhih:  Rest  at  fifth  place. 
131.  3b  ydvia,  §  151  ii ;  6a  utd ;  6f  Viratsthana  verse;  6g  srudhl; 
7djahi.  132.  lb  sasahydma,  §  169  iii;  2b  two  syllables  are  wanting; 
6d,  6e  catalectic  verses. 


i  121-*163  295 

133.    *l-5  see  §  88  ;  *lc  ahhivldgyd  ;   *2c  chindhf;  He  i  syllable 

is  wanting;  6a  hypersyllabic.  verse,  unless  irudki  is  a  -loss:  Jmlrhi  \ 
6f  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224;  7c  devdnaam;  7e  ,lrrf.ih,  §  167  iv. 
134.  2d  perhaps  irddhiai,  §  146  ii ;  3d  catalectic  verse;  3f  eakfayd  : 
5g  asurydt,  §  135;  6a  esaam ;  6b  somdnaam ;  6d  w£«.  135.  lb  I; 
at  the  fifth  place;  2f  vdhd;  4f  Gautami  verse,  cf.  §  226  iii  a,  rather 
than  candard ;  5b  Viratsthana  verse ;  5f  indrdvdyu ;  8a  vaJtai/ir, 
j    170   i;    9a   yayw,   §    170   ii/       136.     3d  ft&amp;fe ;    4e  adyd;    M  ji6k. 

138.  2f    Gautami    verse;    3f   hybrid   verse;    4a  sii  ;     lb,    !«■    njdsaa. 

139.  lc  indravdyd;  5c  ddslt,  §  178;  8a  mcf  sd ;  lib  the  insertion  of 
ye  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse  is  metrically  desirable. 

P.    I  140-164     [The  collection  is  similar  in  character  to  Mandala  vii. 

See  §  107  ii.] 

140.  la  vedisdde,  §  166  ii ;  4b  ujuvah  requires  correction,  perhaps 
to  j  ujuvah  or  dhljuvah;  7b  evd;  10c  probably  avdsia;  13a  abhi; 
13c  perhaps  to  be  corrected,  as  to  gdvyam  ydnto  ydviam  dlrghd  aha. 
141.  8a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  :  yaatdh;  10c  nu  ;  lie  rasmimr  }va 
with  Sandhi  ;  12a  sudiotmd,  §  151  ii :  jlrd-asvah  ;  13a  simivadbhih, 
§  168  ii.  142.  lb  adyd;  2a  the  semi-cadence  here  and  in  7a  indicates 
a  transition  to  Epic  Anustubh  ;  8d  adyd.  143.  7c  didiat.  144.  4d 
purd  adverb,  §  160  i ;  6d  asate.  145.  la  jagdma ;  lb  sd,  §  175  i; 
4b  yujia;  5a,  5d  Rests  at  the  fifth  place;  5a  dpia.  146.  2c  wrvidk  : 
3c  anapdvrjyd,  §  167  i.  147.  lb  Gautami  verse;  2c  tnah  the  second 
time;  3d  nd  ha,  §  175  ii ;  4c  sd',  5a  sahasia.  148.  lb  visva-pusam, 
cf.  i  162  22b  :  cf.  H.  Oldenberg  in  tiacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xlvi, 
p.  174;  2c  Gautami  verse;  3a  nu ;  4b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place; 
5a  perhaps  add  yam  at  end  of  the  verse;  5d  probably  Viratsthana, 
but  see  §  142  iii  b. 

149.  2c  Pentad  verse;  3a  Viratsthana  verse;  3c  suurah,  §  151  i, 
satd-atmd  ;  4a  Pentad  verse  ;  4c  apdam  is  doubtful  here  ;  5a  verse  with 
double  Rest,  §  226  iv  b.  150.  For  the  metre  see  §  242  ii ;  la  dctfudn. 
151.  la  simid;  3a  rodasoh,  §  151  iii;  4a  asurd,  §  174  ii ;  4d  gdam, 
§142  ii,  yufijathe,  §  170  i;  6b  mitrd...vdrund,  §  166  i;  8d  dsathe; 
9a  dadhathe,  dsathe.  153.  la  Pentad  verse  ;  2a  Viratsthana  verse ; 
±c  utd.  154.  Id  trayidhd;  3a  Viratsthana  verse.  155.  la  pdantam, 
§  142  iii«;  lc  perhaps  restore  sdnavi:  delete  the  comment  on  p.  144; 
3d  see  §  178;  4d  Sandhi  at  caesura;  5b  abhikhydyd:  Viratsthana 
verse.       156.     lc  ddha. 

157.  3b  jlrdsuah  probably.  158.  lc  aucathid  probably,  §  136  i; 
3b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place.       159.     2a"  Rest  at  the  fifth  place. 

*161.  lc  nindima;  8a  hybrid  verse  with  irregular  opening,  or  (more 
probably)  with  irregular  Sandhi  idbdakdm,  §  130  iv;  8d  madayddlami  : 
1 2a  sammi lyd ;  12c  asapatd;  14a  bhumi'  dgnih  ;  14c  Rest  at  the  fifth 
place.  *162.  4a  havisydm  (y  cons.);  6d  utd;  7a  probably  snuht  ma 
adhdyi,  §  151  iii;  8b  slrsanya  (y  cons.);  14b  probably  four  syllables 
are  missing,  read  as  16c;  15a  tud ;  16c  contains  no  trace  of  rhythm, 
and  needs  correction:   read  ydt  samd&amp;nam  ydc'ca  pddtnfam  &lt;irvatah; 


296  Metrical  Commentary 

*164.  7  a  i,  §  178;  13d  eva;  16c  as  7a;  17a,  23d  hybrid  verses:  in 
23d  perhaps  omit  it;  32a  sd;  35b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  38c  perhaps 
visu-ancd,  §  166  iv  ;  40c  addhi  ;  40d  pibd ;  45d  hybrid  verse  ;  48c  Rest 
at  the  fifth  place. 

Q.  I  165-190.  Mana  collection.  [One  of  the  most  homogeneous 
collections  in  the  Rigveda :  but  173,  174,  186  have  the  archaic 
character  more  strongly  marked  than  the  rest  of  the  hymns.  The  late 
hymns  170,  179  have  found  their  way  into  this  collection  in  consequence 
of  its  ascription  to  Agastya.     See  §  106  iii.] 

165.  3a  Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type) ;  6a  svadhd  (final  -a  shortened 
before  following  vowel):  but  dsit  is  a  very  doubtful  form  in  this  hymn, 
and  more  probably  we  should  read  aid  and  then  svadhd  ah ;  7a  bhuri 
(plur.);  8d  cakard,  §  158  i;  10b  nu  ;  lib  snitia:  cakrd ;  12c  -cdksid; 
13b  ydtand;  13d  bhutd;  14b  Viratsthana  verse;  14c  varttd;  15c  a 
dative  vaytiyai  seems  required.  166.  lc  aidhe  'va,  Bollensen  O.  and  O. 
ii  473;  Id  yudhe  'va  ib. ;  12d  drddhuam  ;  13b  purusdrhsa  appears  to 
be  a  proper  name,  §  160  i.  167.  la  Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type)  ; 
lb  hybrid  verse;  lc  Rest  at  the  fourth  place:  raydyah,  §  139  i; 
2b  brhddivaih,  §  178;  2c  ddhd  ydd ;  4a  aydasah  §  151  i  and  yavlyd 
§  173  ii  are  doubtful;  6c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  7b  Rest  at 
the  fourth  place;  8a  padnti ;  8b  aryamd ;  9a  nahi  nu ;  10a  adyd: 
prdyistha,  Viratsthana  verse  ;   10b  sudh;  1  Od  nardam. 

168.  lb  omit  u,  giving  a  catalectic  verse  ;  lc  rodasoh,  cf.  ix  22  5a ; 
2c  apdam ;  3a  trptd-arhsavah ;  5c  dhanua-cyutah,  §  147  :  isdam; 
Qhdyayd;  6c  cyavayatha.  169.  lc  marutaam;  2c  Rest  at  the  fourth 
place;  4c  cdkdnanta,  §  169  iii;  5b  Viratsthana  verse:  but  see 
§  142  iii  b ;  5c  su;  5d  gdtuyanti,  §  168  iii;  6c  ddhd:  hybrid  verse. 
*170.     la  sudh  ;  4a  catalectic  verse. 

171.  Id  dhattd)  6a  sdhyasah  is  probable.  172.  la  catalectic 
verse ;  3a  nU ;  3b  vriiktd.  173.  2c  catalectic  Bhargavi  verse, 
§  227  iii  b ;  3a  sddmd ;  4a  requires  correction,  §  225  ;  4c  double  Rest, 
§  226  iv b  ;  4d  Viratsthana  verse;  5b  probably  Rest  at  the  fourth  place, 
but  see  §  151  i ;  7  c  irregular  cadence  :  the  resolution  of  o  in  ksonih  is 
very  doubtful,  but  see  §  151  i;  8c  bhuut;  8d  yddl ;  9b  nardam; 
11a  Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type);  lie  perhaps  tatrsdnd,  §  169  iii  ; 
12b  avaydjah,  §  151  iii  after  Th.  Benfey ;  12c  perhaps  yavlyd,  §  173  ii. 

174.  la  Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type);  2c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place: 
anavadya  drndh ;  3b  dydani  or  didm ;  3d  Pentad  verse,  or  read 
&lt;Iii  ma  a;  4a  nu  \  perhaps  sdsmi,  §  178;  5a  vdhd, ;  5b  vdatasya  dsvd ; 
6a  double  Rest,  §  226  iv  a  :  mitrd-lrun  Grassmann  :  but  emendation  is 
rather  required;  7b  ksadm;  8c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  9b  Viratsthana 
verse;  9d  caesura  after  the  third  syllable;  10a  tvdm;  10b,  10c  perhaps 
Pentad  verses:  otherwise  nardam,  sprdhdam.  175.  4c  vdhd:  catalectic 
verse  ;  4d  vdtasya  dsuaih,  §  151  ii,  or  perhaps  vdatasydsuaih  with  long 
fifth  syllable ;  6b  mayo  'va.       176.     3b  ksitlndam  ;  5c  catalectic  verse. 

177.  2c,  3a  tisthd ;  4a  devayd  'yam  with  Sandhi,  §  130  ii ; 
4d  nisddyd:  hdrlhd  with  Sandhi,  §  128  ii;  5a  sustutah  (nom.)  is 
probable.       178.     lc  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  5c  u. 

180.  3c  Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  4a  extended  Tristubh  verse ; 
5b  perhaps  gdvah,  §  142  ii,  cf.  i  181  8d ;   6c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place  : 


i  #164-iY  10  2!)7 

vdatah;  9c  probably  sudsviam,  giving  an  extended  Tristubh  verse, 
cf.  4a.  181.  la  prdyistha  isdam;  Id  vdsudhitl,  §  166  iv  ;  5a  extended 
Tristubh  verse;  7b  trayidhd;  8c  pipdya ;  8d  as  180  5b.  182.  2c 
vahathe,  §  170  i;  3a  dsathe ;  8c  adyd.  183.  5c  rjuyd,  $  168  iii. 
184.  la  adyd;  lb  ucchdntidm;  lc  s&lt;mta  with  -a  shortened,  §  174  ia; 
Id  sudads-,  §  142  v;  2a  sS;  3a  isukfte  'va,  Bollensen  ;  4a  mddhui; 
5b  mdniebhih  or  Rest  at  the  fourth  place.  185.  9c  bhdrl  cid  perhaps 
as  adverb :  4sudads-,  §  1 42  v. 

186.  2c  Pentad  verse;  3a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  5b  caesura  after 
the  third  syllable;  5c  apdam;  6a  tvdsta  d;  7d  nardam;  8c  caesura 
combined  with  Sandhi ;  9a  nti  ;  9c  ddhd ;  9d  perhaps  jrrusaydnta, 
cf.  £  168  iii;  10a  prd  u ;  10c  vdatah;  11a  wo  We.  187.  la  may  be 
restored  thus:  pitum  nu  u  astavisam,  cf.  §  151  i;  2b  tud;  4a  tie; 
6b  devdnaam;  7c  dtra ;  7d  catalectic  verse;  11a,  lib  probably  need 
emendation.  188.  5a  we  should  probably  read  vibhuh  prabhfih,  cf. 
§  166  iv.  189.  la  ndyd  ;  2c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place :  puuh  (§  151  i) 
is  more  than  doubtful ;  3a  yuyodhi ;  4a  pahi ;  6a  ghd  tudvdn  ;  7d  an 
irregular  verse,  both  in  the  opening  and  the  break.  190.  3d  bhlmd 
'raks-,  with  Sandhi  at  the  caesura ;  6a  supra-etuh,  suydvasah ;  7c  Rest 
at  the  fourth  place. 

*191.  la,  3a,  5c  catalectic  verses ;  6a  prthvi,  §  151  iii;  6c  catalectic 
verse.  10-13.  The  metre  here  is  disturbed,  see  §  194.  In  10c  the 
sense  requires  that  no  should  belong  to  the  following  verse,  and  in  lOf 
the  unaccented  tud  is  clearly  out  of  place  at  the  beginning.  In  13c 
there  is  a  further  disturbance  owing  to  the  words  are  asya  being 
placed  earlier  in  the  verse.  14a  heptasyllabic  verse;  16d  hyper- 
syllabic  verse. 

Maiidala  II. 

[The  collection  as  a  whole  is  of  the  normal  period,  and  the  metre  is 
very  regular,  Jagati  being  prominent.  The  few  archaic  hymns,  such 
as  4,  11,  19,  20,  22,  41  16-18  seem  to  represent  the  original  collection 
of  the  Grtsamada  family.     See  §  109  ii.] 

1.  lb  adbhidh;  7d  probably  ddma  d  as  in  8a,  §  151  iii ;  ta  dvidhat, 
§  169  vi;  8d  no  caesura,  §  214;  13a  aaditydsah,  §  150;  14c  suadanta, 
§145  vi.  2.  la  Rest  at  the  fourth  place,  yet  strange  in  this  hymn  : 
vardhatd;  2d  bhaasi,  §  142  iii  a ;  7b  srutiai;  9b  pipdya:  brhddivesu, 
§178;  11a  sahasia.  3.  3c  valid',  extended  Tristubh  verse;  6a  sadhu, 
§§  160  i,  173  iii;  6b  vayie  'va  ;  6c  catalectic  verse  ;  lib  it;  lie  valid. 
4.  la  -diotmdna?n,  §  151  ii;  2a  apdam;  2d  probably  devdn  as  gen.  pi. 
(cf.  vi  11  3b,  51  2b),  and  jlrd-asvah;  3b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place: 
ksesidntah;  4a  suydvaseva,  §  151  iii;  5d  Rest  at  the  fifth  place; 
6a  perhaps  tatysand^  §  169  iii;  6b  probably  svanista,  §  151  iii; 
6c  krsnd-adlivd  ;  6d  diauh ;  7b  suayuh ;  8b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  ; 
8d  su-apatydm  :  hybrid  verse  ;   9c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place. 

5.  7a  sudh  sudya.  6.  lc  u  sU;  5b  anarvdnam,  §  170  ii  c; 
7c  jdnyo    'va.       *8.     6a   Epic    Anustubh   semi- cadence :    see    p.    42. 

9.  2a  u;    2d  didiat;    5a  vasavydm,  §135;  5d  krdhi:    su-apatydsya. 

10.  2d  drum  (dual)  with  hiatus  ;   5a  prati-dncam. 


298  Metrical  Commentary 

11.  For  the  metre  see  §  250  i;  Id,  2b  Tristubh  verses;  2c  perhaps 
dmartam ;  3a  it  should  probably  be  omitted  :  nU ;  3b  rudriyesu  ca 
requires  emendation,  the  omission  of  ca  being  the  first  step;  4e  probably 
omit  indra;  5c  utd  :  tastambhudmsam,  §  145  ii  c;  6a  as  4c ;  6b  stavd, 
§  151  iii;  7b  asvaristdm,  §  151  iii ;  7d  Rest  at  the  fourth  place; 
8d  Tristubh  verse;  9d,  10b  Tristubh  openings;  lOd  Rest  at  the  fifth 
place;  12b  Tristubh  verse;  13c  as  9d  ;  15a  vydntu  in  nu ;  15c  double 
Rest ;  17a  omit  it ;  17b  as  9d ;  17c  prindnd  ;  17d  ydhi  :  Pentad  verse  ; 
19a,  20a  as  9d ;  21  concluding  verse  borrowed  from  ii  19. 

12.  4c  jigivdn,  £178;  be  sd  Wydh;  5d  dhattd;  7c  usdsam, 
§  170  ii  a.  13.  la  tdsidh,  §  146  i;  4b  rayim  }va;  8d  adyd;  9a  d 
'diah,  §  145  iii;  13a  vasu,  §  170  ii/;  13b  vamvydm,  §  135.  The  last 
stanza  properly  belongs  to  14.  14.  Id  juhotd;  2b  asdnl  W,  §  139  iii ; 
2c  bharatd;  3d  urnutd ;  5b,  5c  Rests  at  the  fourth  place;  lib  ksdmia. 
15.  5c  utsndya  ;  7a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place.  16.  5a  catalectic  verse. 
17.  5d  secondary  caesura,  §  213  ii:  dydam;  6c  perhaps  sayddhiai, 
§  146  ii ;  6d  on  dvrnak  see  §  169  vi;  8d  krdhi.  18.  la  perhaps  read 
ndva  ayoji  ;  2b  utd  tritiyam ;  2d  sd.  The  cadence  is  probably,  but 
not  certainly,  that  of  Jagati,  cf.  i  1 40  2c  ;  3c  md  sd ;  4a  dudbliydm ; 
5b  hypersyllabic  opening,  §217;  5d  d  sastid;  5d,  6a  perhaps  saptati, 
navati,  cf.  $  139  iii;   7c  vihdvia ;   8c  jydyisthe ;   8d  jigivdn,  §  178. 

19.  lb  svdndsya,  §  140  iii:  Viratsthana  verse;  3a  Viratsthana 
verse  (indra  type);  3d  perhaps  dhnaam;  4a  sd;  5a  requires  emendation ; 
5b  probably  sdtvd,  §  178;  7b  perhaps  dravasid,  §  151  ii  20.  la  sti ; 
lc  didhiatah  ;  Id  no  caesura,  £  214;  2a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place,  if  we 
read  tudbhih  :  but  more  probably  a  double  Rest,  cf.  §  226  iv ;  2b  -pah 
asi  with  Sandhi,  §  130  ii;  2c  Viratsthana  verse;  2d  Rest  at  the  fourth 
place  ;  3a  double  Rest  of  an  irregular  type,  §  227  iii  c ;  3b  nardam ; 
5a  sd;  5c  usdsah,  £  170  ii;  5c  sdtvd,  §  178;  6d  Viratsthana  verse; 
7b  ddaslh  (§  151  i)  is  here  unlikely  ;  8a  tavasydm;  a  change  of  accent 
is  probably  required,  §  135  ;  8b  Gautami  verse;  8d  hatvi  is  suspicious 
in  so  early  a  hymn :  by  restoring  ghndn  the  metre  becomes  correct : 
but  see  §§  130  i,  219.  22.  For  the  metre  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  Nos.  87, 
79  and  84. 

23.  2a  asuriya;  7  b  mdrtiah,  §  151  iii;  8a  tanunaam ;  9b  vdsu 
(plur.) ;  13a  catalectic  verse;  14c  krsvd.  24.  4a  dsmdsiam ;  5a 
bMvltud;  5b  perhaps  insert  vi  before  durah;  6d  u;  14b  kdrmd,  pro- 
bably plural.  25.  3a  simivan ;  5b  sdrma.  26.  2a  vihi ;  4a  dvidhat, 
§  169  vi;  4c  rdksati,  §  175  i.  27.  4c  asurydm,  §  135;  6c  probably 
dditidh ;  10c  rdsvd  ;  13a  suydvasa;  15d  sadhu,  with  -u  of  dual  shortened 
before  a  vowel,  §  174  i  c;  16d  the  verse  seems  to  require  rearrange- 
ment, as  nrdv  dristdh  sdrman  d  siama.  28.  6a  dpa  su  :  bhydsam, 
§151   iii;    7b  bhrindnti.     29.    la  dadityah ;    5a  mimaya. 

30.  lc  yaati,  §  142  iii«;  5a  ksipa  ;  9b  abhikhydyd ;  10b  vlrya  (y 
cons),  §135  a;  10c  jiok;  lid  srutia.  31.  Id  hhivant;  4c  brhadivd ; 
5b  apijti,  see  §  167  v  ;  5c  prthivl ;  7c  irregular  double  Rest  (§  227  iii  c) 
requiring  emendation.  32.  Id  vasuyu,  §  168  iii;  *5b,  *5d  catalectic 
verses ;  *7c  vispdtniai. 

33.  Id  here  and  often  rudard,  a  form  probably  invented  by  the 
poet,  see  §  149  ii;  4c  arpaya;  7d  abhi  nu  ;  8c  for  the  caesura  see 
§213  ii;  9d  asurydm;   13c  dvr/iita,  §  175  i.     34.    3a,  13c  dtia  only  in 


ii  11   lit  39  298 

this  hymn  and  Mandala  ix,  §  151  ii :  3d  ydthd.     35.    5a  avyath\ 
6a   svdr,    §  135,    but   perhaps    rather    extended    Tristubh    verse;    7h 
pipdya;    7c,   13c   sd   ' pdm  with    Sandhi.      36.     la    extended    Pentad 
verse,  §  227  iii  a  :    like  24  5b  above,  it  calls  for  emendation. 

37.  lc  bharatd;  3c  abhigurid.  38.  5a  ddria;  7a  dpia;  9c  nd 
'not'  with  hiatus;  10b  gndaspdti,  §  142  i.  39.  la  grdvdnd  'va  with 
Sandhi,  and  so  frequently  in  this  hymn;  3c  vdstav  usrdh,  §  170  ii  e. 
41.  3a  adyd ;  3b  indra-vdyu ;  4a  perhaps  mitra  varuna ;  5c  dsate ;  7a 
sd,  naasatyd ;  7b  dsvavat ;  8a,  nd  '  not '  with  hiatus  ;  10b  abhi,  §  167  iii ; 
12a  dsabhiah ;  16a  dmbitame  is  probable,  §  166  ii ;  16b  devUame  as  16a  , 
17b  devidm;  17c  matsud;  18a  brdhmd  (plur.) ;  18c  mdnmd.  *42.  3a 
krauda.     *43.    2b  brahmaputro  'va  ;  2c  hybrid  verse  :  apitid. 


Mandala  III. 

[This  collection  is  singularly  homogeneous  :  it  is  also  very  regular, 
but  characterized  by  a  fairly  frequent  use  of  the  VasisthI  verse.  See 
§1101] 

1.  lc  didiat ;  2a  cakrmd;  6a  vavrdja ;  15d  ddmia ;  16b  dhdnid  ; 
23c  sicf£.  2.  7c  s^;  8a  namasydtd;  8b  ddmia-,  lid  msi^  (plur.).  3. 
7a  su-apatye:  dyavi  is  probable.  4.  9b  siasva,  §  148  vi.  5.  2a  /?r« 
id  u.  6.  lb  nayatd  ;  3a  diauh  ;  6c  m^d  :  probably  Viratsthana  verse  ; 
10c  prdcl  'dhv-,  §  128  ii :  but  prdk  or  prdcd  as  an  adverb  is  more 
probable.  7.  5d  gdnia ;  6a,  10c  i^d.  8.  3b  prthividh;  7c  wanto ; 
9a  srayiiiisah.  10.  3c  scf  '(/ne  with  Sandhi.  11.  6a  probably  abhlyujah, 
§  167  iii.  13.  lb  catalectic  verse  ;  7a  rdsvd.  14.  2b  tiibhya  ;  6a  tudt. 
15.  5a  sdrmd  ;  6a  plpayO.  16.  For  the  metre  see  §  94  viii ;  5b  perhaps 
aviratdya  (neuter);  6c  srjd,  and  see  §  213  ii.  17.  3d  bhavd.  18.  2a 
tdpd;  4a  sdtvd,  %  178.      19.    3b  siksd,  su-apatyd;  4c  vahd. 

20.  la  usdsam,  %  170  iia;  lc  srnuantu,  §  147;  2c  d;  5d  dditydn, 
giving  irregular  break  (§218  vi),  followed  by  short  eighth  and  tenth 
syllables  :  this  seems  more  probable  than  reading  aaditydn  and  then 
Jagati  cadence.  21.  5c  stokdh  scotanti  te  vaso  is  a  probable  arrange- 
ment. 22.  la  sd  and  perhaps  ydsmi;  Id  sasanvdn.  23.  4a  Rest  at 
the  fifth  place.  24.  lb  dpdsid.  26.  la  nicdyid.  27.  2c  perhaps 
dhitdvanam,  §  170  ii ;  14a  vfsd  ;  15c  didiatam ;  *28  see  p.  42 ;  *29  see 
p.  42  ;  2a  ardnioh  ;  4b  prthividh  ;  6c  perhaps  dnlvrta,  §  167  i  ;  8a  sidd  ; 
9b  itand. 

30.  4d  nimite  'va;  13d  karma  (plur.)  ;  15a  dfhyd;  20c  suarydvah, 
tdbhya;  21c  divdksd  'si  :  for  the  Sandhi  see  §  130  ii ;  2 Id  sd.  31.  2a 
tdnua;  9c  nu ;  13a  yddl :  13b  rodaslyoh,  §  173  ii ;  lid  sd ;  15a  pnru- 
candrdm ;  20c  extended  Tristubh  verse,  unless  we  correct  by  reading 
indra  tvd?h  nah.  32.  6b  for  the  possible  Sandhi  see  §  1 30  iii :  but 
sdrtava  u  is  probably  the  right  reading,  §  171  v ;  8a  kdrmd ;  15a  sudhii, 
§  145  vi;  16b  nd  'not'  with  hiatus.  33.  *13a  Epic  Anustubh  semi- 
cadence. 

34.  6b  kdrmd;  7b  devebhiah;  8b  sasanvamsam ;  9d  prd  'nam. 
35.  3a  upa;  7d  tiibhya;  9d,  10a  pibd.  36.  Id  mahdbhih,  §178;  6b 
rathio  'va ;  9a  bhard.  38.  2d  nd ;  5a  jidydn ;  7c  asuriyam,  39.  8c 
bhdrl  cit  probably. 


300  Metrical  Commentary 

40.  2b  haryd  ;  3a  dhitdvanam,  §  170  ii  c;  5a  dadhisvd.  41.  6a 
mandasva.  43.  5c  me  'rsim  :  for  the  Sandhi  see  §  1 30  i ;  7a  pibd.  44. 
2a  usdsam,  §  170  ii.  45.  lb  yaM ;  2c  hdrioh.  46.  5a  -didvd,  §  145  vi. 
47.  2c  jahi;  3c  tud.  48.  3a  upasthdyd.  49.  la  perhaps  ydsmi,  §  178  ; 
2a  raz;  2d  %%,  §  178. 

51.  10b  rddhdnaam.  *52.  See  p.  43;  6c  tud;  8a  bharatd.  53.  2d 
no  caesura,  §  214;  4d  dhanad,  §  147 ;  11a  pretd  ;  lie  extended  Tristubh 
verse  ;  16c  catalectic  verse  ;  *17c pdtalye  (y  cons.),  §  135  a;  *22c  Epic 
Anustubh  semi-cadence.  54.  lc  ddmia ;  4a  utd ;  4d  prthivl ;  17b 
bhdvathd ;  20c  aadityaih,  §  150.  55.  la  usdsah,  §  170  ii;  2a  ma; 
3b  didie ;  17b  s&lt;f  'nyasmin  ;  18a,  18b  f»4&amp;  56.  3b  tri-udhd  is  not 
required  by  the  metre,  but  seems  probable.  57.  5d  sddayd  :  ca, 
§  175  ii ;    6d  rdsvd. 

58.  6b  apparently  jahndvidm,  with  irregular  cadence.  59.  2d 
hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224  :  Sandhi  combination  of  all  the  words  in  the 
first  part  of  the  verse  is  unlikely.  60.  5d  matsud  ;  6b  sdcid.  61.  4b 
probably  usd  d  ydti.  62.  lb  tujia;  2a,  u;  4c  rdsvd  ;  7a  pusan,  but  see 
§177  iii ;  7c  tubhya ;  15a  dyu ;  16a  abhi  should  probably  be  read  for  d, 
a  heptasyllabic  verse  being  improbable  in  this  collection  :  perhaps 
mitra  varuna. 


Mandala  IV. 

[This  Mandala  is  also  of  a  homogeneous  character,  except  so  far  as 
the  metrical  standard  varies  between  those  of  the  strophic  and  normal 
periods.     Lyric  verse  is  rare.     See  §  109  i.] 

1.  For  the  metres  of  stanzas  1—3  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  Nos.  75,  62 
and  83 ;  le  janatd ;  2a  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224,  unless  ague  be 
omitted,  §  152  i:  vavHsud;  2c  jy ay istham ;  3a  vavrtsud  ;  5c  yaksvd  ; 
5d  mfllkdm;  7d  probably  aridh,  §  151  ii  ;  9c  dilria;  lOd  diauh;  12d 
for  the  Sandhi  see  §  127  b  ;  13a  manusyah  (y  cons.),  §  135  a ;  15b  gdah, 
§  142  ii;  17b  devidh  ;  17d  rju  (plur.);  19c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place; 
20a,  20b  visvesaam. 

2.  lc  mahind,  §  151  ii;  2d  the  verse  as  it  stands  has  a  Rest  at  the 
fifth  place  and  a  long  ninth  syllable  :  but  sukrdn  should  probably  be 
corrected  ;  4d  u,  valid ;  5a  the  cadence  becomes  regular  if  yajndh  and 
asvi  are  interchanged;  7d  dadsvdn,  §142  v;  8d  ddsudmsam ;  10c 
hotard,  §  149  iii;  lie  su-apat- ;  12b  duria ;  12c  dfsia  ;  13c  bhard ; 
18c  mdrtdnaam;    19c  sucandrd;    19d  caesura  after  third  syllable. 

3.  3b  sumflikdya  in  spite  of  the  metre,  §178;  4a  sdmiai;  5d 
Gautami  verse ;  6c  ndasatydya :  yakse,  A.  Ludwig ;  6d  probably  a 
Gautami  verse,  as  5d,  rather  than  with  rudardya  :  but  see  §  149  ii ; 
9d  probably  Rest  at  the  fifth  place:  pipdya ;  lib  Pentad  verse;  12c 
Gautami  verse  ;  13b  ma  for  md  before  vowel ;  13d  Pentad  or  Gautami 
verse  :  14b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place  :  prindndh  ;  14c  rujd ;  16a  tubhya  ; 
16b  ni?iid,  §  151  ii. 

4.  lc  Rest  at  the  fifth  place:  drundndh;  Id  vidhya  is  probable  ; 
2d,  3a  srjd ;  8  b  sdm  devdtdtd,  H.  Oldenberg  ;  12d  paantu  is  doubtful, 
on  account  of  the  rhythm ;  13d  nd  ha,  §  175  ii ;  14b  as'idma,  §  147  i ; 
14c  siidayd.     5.    2a  mdhya;  5a  vidntah  ;  5d  ajanata,  §  175  i;  14c  ihd, 


iii  10-iv  39  301 

§  175  ii.  6.  la  su;  2c  perhaps  urdhudm ;  3c  navajdah,  §  142  i;  4c 
pasupdah  ib.  ;  6d  tanul,  §  158  iv ;  9b  rju-dncah;  9d  ahuanta,  §  142  iii. 
7.  lc  perhaps  viruructih,  §  169  ii ;  11a  trs4,  probably  plural,  cf.  §  160  i  ; 
lid  caesura  after  the  third  syllable.  8.  2a  veda  :  perhaps  vdsudhiti, 
§  166  iv;  6b  sasanvdmsah.  9.  la  mf[d ;  2c  visvesaam ;  3a  sddmd 
(plur.);    4b  utd. 

10.  For  the  metre  see  §  249  iii;  Id  rdhidma,  §  147  i ;  4c  perhaps 
dasema,  §  178.  11.  2d  rdsvd.  12.  6c  evd.  15.  7a  catalectic  verse  ; 
9a,  10a  deva  with  -a  shortened  before  vowel,  §  174  \a.  16.  lib  hdrioh 
and  probably  isdnah,  §178;  lie  gddhia;  12c  mrnd ;  15a  Rest  at  the 
fifth  place:  vasuydntah,  §  168  iii;  20b  probably  Rest  at  the  fifth  place; 
21a  nu  u. 

17.  la  tubhya;  lc  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  15a  extra  verse  belonging 
to  14.  *18.  2a  durgdham  etdd  with  Sandhi,  §  130  iv;  2d  tuena  twice; 
4c  nahi  nu ;  5a  avadydm  'va;  lib  tud.  19.  4b  vdar,  §  151  i; 
5b  extended  Tristubh.  20.  la  the  resolution  duurdt  (§151  i)  is 
improbable  :  durdt  and  indrah  may  well  be  interchanged ;  4a  u  sU ; 
4c  pdah ;    5b  sfma  ;    6b  evd. 

21.  This  hymn  contains  several  Viratsthana  verses,  which  are 
unusual  in  this  Mandala :  namely  6c,  7a,  7c,  10a;  Id  diauk ;  2a 
stavathd ;  5c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place,  unless  we  transfer  d  to  the 
beginning  of  this  verse ;  6a  yddl ;  8b  apdam  ;  9a  sukrtd,  dual  with 
Sandhi.  22.  3a  devd  \\  -tamah ;  3b  mahdbhih,  §  178;  3d  didm;  4b 
diaiih;  7b  irregular  break;  9d  jahi.  23.  6b  bhrdtardm,  §  149  iii. 
25.     l&amp;'adyd:    Rest  at  the  fourth  place;    2b  vdstav. 

26.  4a  su  ;  4b  caesura  aiter  the  third  syllable ;  5a  yddl.  The 
violent  disturbance  of  the  metre  which  extends  from  6b  to  7a  must  be 
due  to  some  corruption  of  the  text.  The  original  may  have  run  some- 
what as  follows  :  pardvdtah  sakuno  mddhumantam  |  somam  bharad 
devdvdn  dddrhdno  \  diva  addya  uttardd  amUsmdt  \\  dddyd  somam  abharac 
chiendh :  for  devdvdn  see  §  168  ii,  for  siendh  §  145  vi ;  7d  Pentad 
verse.  27.  3b  yddl ;  3c  jydm  with  y  consonant  stands  here  alone  in 
the  Rigveda  proper,  §  140  iii ;  4a  indravatah,  §  168  ii.  28.  3c  krdtud 
is  probable,  but  very  rare,  §  151  ii ;  3d  sdrud,  §  139  v;  5d  perhaps 
ksdah,  §  142  i:  tdtrddnd,  §  169  iii. 

29.  There  are  many  irregularities  in  the  break,  namely  in  Id,  2c, 
3a,  3d,  4c.  30.  3a  tud;  3b  perhaps  yuyudhuh,  §  169  iii;  8d  extra 
verse;  9b  catalectic  verse;  14a  irregular  cadence;  20b  dsiat ;  24d 
extra  verse.  31.  3a  abhi  su;  4a  probably  abhi,  §  167  iii;  iavavrtsud; 
5b  ha,  §  175  ii ;  6c  tve ;  7a  tvdm,  long  fifth  syllable;  11a  ihd,  §  175  ii : 
vrnlsud.  32.  3a  long  seventh  syllable ;  4b  tud ;  6a  bhuydma  su 
tuavatah;  10c  abhitid ;  14b  matsud;  23a  Jcanlnake  'va;  23c  sobhate, 
§  170  i.' 

33.  7a  duddasa;  10a  caesura  after  the  third  syllable:  but,  as  this 
is  strange  in  this  hymn,  we  may  perhaps  read  ye  medhdyd  hdri  ulilui. 
34.  Id  agmata,  §  175  i  ;  3d  agriydh  utd  combined,  §  130  ii ;  4c  pibatd  ; 
4d  see  §  178  ;  6d  pdtd.  35.  2d  vicakrd,  §  158  i;  5a  sdcia  'kartd;  5b, 
5c  sdcyd  '/carta.  36.  4a  cakra,  §  158  i;  8a  dhisdndbhiah.  37.  4b 
Viratsthana  verse;  7b  citana,  §  159  iii;  8b  ndsatia,  §  150  ii ;  8d  Sastd. 

38.  la  utd,  §  171  iv:  ddtard,  §  149  iii ;  lc  ksetrdsdam,  §  142  i;  4a 
gddhia;    5d    ca  dechd ;    6b  srdyinibhih.      39.     2d    perhaps    tdrutram, 


302  Metrical  Commentary 

§  169  v;  4d  perhaps  indaram,  §  149  i  ;  *6c  surabhi  (plur.).  40.  la 
nti;  2c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place:  4c  -tdvituat,  §§  151  ii,  169  iv;  5b 
vedlsdd,  §  166  ii. 

41.  2d  mahdbhih  ;  3a  dhdyistha  ;  3b  sasamanebhiah ;  5b  vrsabhd  'va ; 
10a  rdthia;  lib  indrd . . .varund,  cf.  §  166  i.  42.  la  rdstardm,  §  149  iii ; 
2a  mdhya ;  2b  asurydni,  §  135;  5a,  5b  mdam;  9a  vaam;  10a  sasan- 
vdmsah  seems  necessary,  though  against  the  metre:  see  §  178.  43. 
lc  long  ninth  syllable;  4a  bhuut  or  bhuvat ;  4d  probably  we  should 
read  mddhul  and  omit  nah ;  5c  mddhul ;  7d  naasatyd.  44.  5d 
Viratsthana  verse.  45.  2d  tanudntah,  §  147 ;  3b  yuiijathdm ;  5b 
vdstav,  §  170  iie;    6b  as  2d. 

46.  3b  etc.  indrdvdyu.  47.  4d  indrdvdyu.  48.  This  hymn 
contains  several  catalectic  verses;  la  hotara,  §  149  iii;  lb  perhaps 
aridh,  §  151  ii;  lc  perhaps  candrd  (instr.),  §  84  A  1  ;  Id  ydhi ;  3a 
vdsiulhitl,  §  166  iv.  50.  2c  Pentad  verse;  11a  indara.  51.  2a  u ;  2c 
dudrd,  §  145  vi;  10c  siondt.     52.    2a  citra  with  -a  shortened  ;  4a  tud. 

55.  lb  trdsithdm,  §  170  i;  4c  it;  5b  probably  avari,  §  151  ii ;  5c 
pdat ;  6b  dpia ;  6c  extended  Tristubh  verse ;  8a  vasavydsya ;  8c 
asmdbhya.  56.  la:  the  latter  part  reads  prthivlhd  jydyisthe  :  for  the 
Sandhi  see  §  128  ii;  3d  sdcid  ;  4a  perhaps  brhdbhih,  §  178  ;  6c  uhidthe, 
§  147  i.  *57.  5a  jusetlwim  is  probably  a  gloss  ;  6b  tud.  *58.  See 
p.  43  ;  3b  due ;  5a  hfdia ;  9a  kanyah  (y  cons.),  §  135  a  :  or  kanidh  'va  ; 
10c  nay  aid;  lid  catalectic  verse. 


Mandala  V. 

[The  hymns  in  Anustubh  with  occasional  extra  verse  stand  alone 
in  the  Rigveda,  and  appear  in  the  main  to  constitute  the  original  Atri 
collection.  In  these  hymns  hiatus  is  extremely  common.  The  trimeter 
hymns  agree  closely  with  the  second  Mandala  in  character,  only  a  few 
bearing  indications  of  early  date.     See  §§  105  i,  109  iii.] 

1.  11a  adyti;  lib  tistha;  12d  uru-dncam,  §178.  2.  12e  extra 
verse.  3.  10a  bhdri  ndmd,  §  159  iv.  4.  6b  sudyai;  7a  Pentad 
verse :  ucdtliaih  is  an  attractive  correction,  §  151  iii.  5.  7b  perhaps 
hotdra,  §  174  ii ;  10b  irregular  cadence:  perhaps  read  ndma  guhid ; 
lie  devebhiah.  6.  2a  sd;  5d  tubhya ;  6a  prd  u;  9c  utd :  pupuridh, 
§  147  i;  10a  evd  with  hiatus;  lOd  asu-dsviam.  7.  2a  kutra;  5a  smd; 
7c  hiri-smasdruh,  §  151  iii ;  7d  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  191  iii;  8a  smd ; 
8b  svdditir  'va,  §  129  ii ;  lOd,  lOe  sasahidt,  §§  147  i,  169  iii ;  lOe  cata- 
lectic verse.  8.  la  perhaps  rtaydvah,  §  168  iii.  9.  2a  dadsvatah; 
3a,  4a  smd-,    7a  abhi,  §  167  iii. 

10.  Id  pdnthaam ;  2c  tue,  §  173  v;  4d  yesaam ;  6a  nu  u;  7c 
vibhfimham,  §  166  iv.  11.  Id  -ebhiah.  12.  3c  veda.  13.  2b  adyd ; 
5c  rasvd.  15.  5a  ml;  5c  Pentad  verse.  16.  3a  maghdvanah  or 
perhaps  maghdvanah ;  5a  nu  u.  17.  3a  va  'sd  u :  the  Sandhi  is 
unusual,  perhaps  read  asya  'sail  vd  u,  cf.  §§130  iii,  171  v;   5a,  nu  u. 

18.  3c  yesaam ;  4b  pdanti ;   5b  dsvdnaam ;    5e  extra  verse :    nfndam. 

19.  1,2    Trochaic    Gayatri ;    5b  vayUnd  appears  to  be  a  gloss  on 
bhdsmand,  §  152  i;    5c,  5d  catalectic  dimeter  verses;    5e  -sthdah. 

21.    3c   tud.     22.    3a  tud ;    3c  probably  vdrenyasya  with  y  cons., 


iv  40-v  51  303 

§  137  iii;  4b  sahasia.  23.  lb  perhaps  prasdhd,  §  1G7  v;  3c  vidnii. 
24.  For  the  metre  see  S  242  iii.  25.  3b  suniatid;  7b  area  ;  7c,  7d 
tudt ;  8c  utd.  27.  2d  ydcchd;  6a  sataddvani.  28.  lb  usdsam, 
§  170  ii a:  perhaps  uruyd,  §  178  (H.  Oldenberg) ;  3a  sardhd.  29.  5a 
tiibhya  ;  8c  ahuanta,  §  142  iii  6;  13a  kathd  nit ;  14d  perhaps  tdviseh, 
§  170  iii;    15b  ndvia,  §  151  ii. 

30.  3d  mi ;  4d  probably  Viratsthana  verse ;  5b  srutia;  6a  perhaps 
tubhyam  id;  6b  sunudnti,  §  147  ;  7c  dtra  ;  9c  uMt£  with  final  shortened 
before  vowel,  §  174  id.  *15a  gdvia,  §  151  ii.  31.  2a  dravd ;  6c 
probably  sdktivah,  §  168  ii :    rodasl  'bhe,  §  128  ii;    13b  md.      32.    3a 

33.  la  didhie;  lc  Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  2b  catalectic  Bhargavi 
verse,  §  227  iii  b;  hdrlnaam;  2c  as  lc;  2d  prd  Widh,  §  145  vi;  3b  dsan; 
4a  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type).  4c  caesura  after  the  third  syllable  : 
the  verse  becomes  regular  if  tatakse  is  placed  at  the  end ;  4d  apparently 
daasdsya :  extended  Tristubh  verse ;  5a  as  4a ;  5b  yaatdh ;  6a  -enyam 
(y  cons.)  :  tue  or  Viratsthana  verse;  6d  tuvl-,  §  166  vi  6  ;  7a  perhaps 
read  evd  na  indra  dkavdbhir  uti  ;  10a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place  is  probable. 
34.    lc  sunotana.     35.    2d  su  ;  8a  indra  ehi. 

36.  la  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type)  ;  5a  tud.  37.  4a  ydsmin. 
38.  3b  catalectic  verse;  4a  utd;  5c,  5d  sugopdah.  40.  lc  etc.  vfsann, 
§  177  iii;  *7a,  7c  Rests  at  the  fifth  place,  but  see  §  151  i;  *9a  Epic 
Anustubh  semi-cadence. 

41.  This  hymn  contains  numerous  Rests,  words  with  resolved  vowels, 
and  examples  of  hiatus ;  lc  trasithdm  ;  3a  ydyistha  (-a  dual  shortened) ; 
4d  dsu-asva- ;  5b  irregular  cadence;  7d  ha}  §  175  ii ;  8b  Viratsthana 
verse;  9a  requires  correction,  §225;  9b  su-aitavah ;  10b  apdam  or 
Pentad  verse  ;  lOd  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  lib  perhaps  raydye,  §  139  i; 
lid  diaiih;  12c  probably  Pentad  or  Gautami  verse;  13a  mahatah  or 
mahaah,  see  §  178  ;  14c  candrd-agrdh ;  14d  see  §  170  iie;  16b  perhaps 
Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  16b,  16c  decha-uktau  ;  16d  Viratsthana  verse  ; 
16e  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  1 9a  Pentad  verse.  42.  2b  hfdia  ;  3&amp;iraya; 
4d  sumati,  §  139  iii;  15b  yuvanyun  is  suspicious  on  account  of  the 
rhythm:  perhaps  yuvayuh ;  17a  extra  verse  to  16;  18  borrowed  from 
v  76. 

43.  3b  bharatd  ;  4a  bdhu,  final  -u  being  shortened  before  the  vowel, 
$  174  ic;  6b  gndam,  §  142  i;  6d  vahd;  lOd  ganta;  13c  gndah  ;  14b 
Viratsthana  verse.  44.  6a  evd;  8d  sd;  10b  catalectic  verse;  *15a, 
*15b,  *15c  hybrid  verses. 

45.  This  hymn  has  many  archaic  variations;  la  visidnn,  §  148  vi ; 
Id  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  ;  2b  Viratsthana  verse  ;  2d-  sthuna  iva ;  3b 
mahtnaam  ;  5a  eta  ;  8c  asaam ;  9a  yaatu,  saptd-asvah.  46.  2b  mdrutam 
utd  with  Sandhi,  §  130  iv  ;  2c  rudardh,  §  149  ii ;  4d  tvdstd  with  hiatus  ; 
8a  gndah,  viantu ;  8b  Gautami  verse.  48.  4c  yddi ;  5b  cdru  (plur.), 
cf.  ix  70  Id  ;  5c  vidmd.  49.  3b  vdstav  usrrfh,  §  170  iie;  5b  probably 
caesura  after  third  syllable  :  su-uktd-.  50.  la  nayituh,  §  142  iii  b  ;  2a 
heptasyllabic  verse;  2b  ca  with  hiatus;  3c  pathesthdam,  §  142  i;  5b 
rdthasas  pdtih,   §  151   iii. 

51.  12b  suasti;  13a  Bhargavi  verse,  §  227  ii  b  :  the  resolution  adid 
can  hardly  be  justified  ;  13d  rudardh,  §  149  ii ;  *14b,  *14d  suasti  gives 
a  better  rhythm,  and  4  should   probably  be  read  throughout;    *14b 


304  Metrical  Commentary 

probably  svasti  pathie,  with  long  fifth  syllable:  but  see  §  135  ;  *14c 
svasti  with  v  cons.,  §  125  Hi  a;  *15a  svasti :  pdnthdm  dnu  with  Sandhi, 
§  130  iv. 

52.  la  sydvdsua,  §  145  ii  b  ;  2d  paanti  ;  3c  marutaam  ;  4d  pdanti  ; 
8c,  9a  smd;  9a  pdrusnidm;  10c  mdhya;  14c  dhrsnava  ojasd  with 
Sandhi  seems  unavoidable:  see  §  130  i;  15a,  nu  u ;  16a  catalectic 
verse;  16b  gdam,  §  142  ii ;  17d  gdvia,  §  151  ii.  53.  For  the  metres 
see  §248  i;  4a  vdsisu ;  8a  ydtd ;  12a  adyd;  13c  dhattand;  14c  vrstui. 

54.  4c  djathd;  6b  kapanti  'va,  §  129  ii;  6d  cdksur  'va  ib. ;  7d 
perhaps  rdjanam,  §  170  ii  c ;  14b  avathd  ;  14d  dhatthd,  and  as  7d. 
55.  4c  w&amp;t ;  10a  nayatd.  56.  lc  marutaam  is  doubtful;  3c  simivdn  ; 
5c  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  7b  sm«.  57.  2a  vtisimantah,  §  168  ii;  2c 
sthd;  7c  krnutd.     58.    4a  S™;  5d  ma^f  is  probable,  §  139  iii;  7b  sudm. 

59.  2b  probably  ndvdh,  §  142  ii ;  5b  yuyudhuh,  §  169  iii ;  7a  srdyiiiih. 

60.  2c  extended  Tristubh  verse ;  8b  pibd. 

61.  2a  the  probable  reading  is  ku  v6  'svdh  ku  abhisavah,  cf.  v  74  la : 
§  151  iii.  Similarly  in  la  ku  is  a  probable  correction  for  ke.  2b  s'ekd, 
§  158  i;  5c  sydvdsua-;  10a  dhenundam;  16c  yajiiydsah,  §  135:  but 
perhaps  the  true  reading  is  yajyavah.  62.  2a  su  ;  3b  mitrd  rdjdnd, 
§  166  i;  9d  jigivdmsah.  63.  6c  vasatd.  64.  2c  vaam,  §  151  i;  3a 
asidm;  3b  yayidm,  §  142  iii  a ;  4a  perhaps  mitra  varuna,  §  166  i;  4b 
dhayidm  ib. ;  4d  stoifndam  or  spuurdhdse,  §  151  i;  5d  sdkhlnaam;  7a 
ucchdntidm.  65.  5c  tudtayah ;  6a  mitrd ;  6d  met  66.  2b  asurydm, 
§  135  :  aiate ;  6b  mitrd,  §  174  ii.  67.  la  deva  is  doubtful,  §  174  ii ;  Id 
dsathe;  3d  pdanti;  5ab  mitra .. .varuna,  §  166  i.  68.  4c  dew.  69.  2c 
tisrndm.  70.  4b  bhujema.  72.  2a,  3a  irregular  cadence.  73.  lc 
puru-  puru-  bhujd,  $§  160  i,   166  iv;    9a  wf  w,  §  171   v. 

74.  la  kua  sthah  ;  the  old  form  ku  is  curiously  preserved  in  a  verse 
where  it  cannot  stand;  deva  with  -d  shortened,  §  174  ia;  2b ndasatyd; 
2d  nadinaam ;  3b  yunjathe,  §  170  i;  6c  nil  u;  7a  adyd ;  8b  ydyistha; 
10c,  lOd  vaam,  §  151  i.  75.  2b  ahdm  sand  requires  correction.  76. 
lc  rdthid.  *78.  5b  susyantidh;  9d  jivantidh.  79.  2c  ucchd.  80.  lc 
nstisam,  §  170  ii  a.     81.    5d  sydvdsuah. 

82.  lc  srdyistham ;  4b,  4c  probably  require  correction  as  follows : 
prajdvat  saubhagam  suvd  \  dusvdpniam  pdrd  suvd.  *83.  See  p.  43  ;  la 
vadd ;  3a  probably  rathir  iva  (Lanman) ;  6b  pinvatd ;  9d  probably 
prthvidm,  §  151  iii;  10c  extended  Tristubh  verse.  84.  2c  Epic  Anustubh 
semi-cadence.     85.    6a  nU. 

86.  la  indrd-agni;  3b  maghdvanoh  or  maghdvanoh;  5b,  5d  deva 
with  -a  shortened,  §  174  ia;  6a  evd  indrd-agnibhydm,  heptasyllabic 
dimeter  verse :  or  read  indraya  agndye.  87.  For  the  metre  see  Ch.  ix, 
App.  No.  63  ;  3c  yesaam ;  4c  sudt ;  9a  catalectic  verse ;  9e  sydtd. 

Mandala  VI. 

[The  original  Bharadvaja  collection  was  of  the  same  metrical  type 
as  that  of  Gotama  Nodhas,  i  58—64,  but  of  larger  extent.  Its  general 
characteristics  are  described  in  §  106  iv.  The  archaic  variations  are 
most  marked  m  the  hymns  4,  10-13,  20,  24-26,  and  63-68  8,  but  are 
also  found  to  a  smaller  extent  in  many  other  hymns.  The  important 
lyric  hymns  46  and  48  also  belong  to  the  original  collection.     Additions 


v  52-vi  21  305 

have  been  made  at  various  times,  and  cannot  always  be  clearly  dis- 
tinguished :  but  a  considerable  number,  especially  amongst  the  Agni 
hymns,  shew  the  metrical  type  of   the  cretic  period.] 

1.  lc  vrsann,  §  177  iii;  3a  vasavyaih,  §  135;  9a  sd  ;  9d  tuotah ; 
13d  vdsu.  2.  9a  tid ;  lib  rodasiyoh,  §173  ii;  lie  viht  3.  3d  kutra; 
4d,  6b  caesura  after  third  syllable;  6a  vdstav  ;  7b  Viratsthana  verse; 
8a  yiljia ;  8b  as  4d  :  suebhih ;  8c  marutaam.  4.  2d  Rest  at  the  tifth 
place  ;  4b  hiatus  after  -a  and  -«;  4c  perhaps  tudm ;  5a  nitiktl ;  8d  Rest 
at  the  fourth  place.  5.  2a  tve,  puru-anlka  ;  6a  krdhl.  6.  4  b  ksdam. 
8.    3c  cdrmani  'va  ;  5d  vrscd. 

10.  lb  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224,  or  omit  agnini,  §  152  i ;  3a 
pipdya ;  4a  Viratsthana  verse ;  4b  bhaasd,  krsnd-adhva  :  ddhd ;  4c 
bahu  cit,  cf.  §  160  i;  6d  gddhia ;  7a,  7b  extra  verses  to  stanza  6.  11. 
lc  ndasatyd;  3a  dhdnid  :  irregular  cadence  ;  3c  caesura  after  the  third 
syllable.  12.  2b,  §120;  4a  sd  with  hiatus ;  4c  krdtud  probably,  §  151  ii ; 
5b  see  §  151  iii;  5d  dhdnud,  §  147  ;  6a  double  Rest,  §  227  iii  c;  6c 
yaasi:  irregular  cadence.  13.  la  tudt ;  lc  Viratsthana  verse;  3d 
apdam ;  4d  vasavyaih  ;  5d  probably  extended  Tristubh  verse.  14.  2a, 
3b  catalectic  verses  :  less  probably  aridh  in  3b,  §  151  ii;  5c,  5d  dvrtah, 
§  167  iv. 

15.  la  su;  Id  jiok :  Bhargavi  verse,  §227  ii6;  3a  bhuuh;  3d 
yacchd  ;  3e  extra  (dimeter)  verse ;  4a  perhaps  diotanam,  cf.  20  8c ; 
6e  extra  verse  ;  8c  mdrtidsah,  §  151  iii ;  9a  ubhdyd  (neut.  pi.) ;  12b  u  : 
sahasdvann,  §  177  iii;  12d  caesura  after  the  third  syllable;  13c 
devdnaam;  14a  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224;  15c  Rest  at  the  fourth 
place;  15e  extra  verse;  16d  nayd;  18a  jdnisva;  *19c  asthuri,  §  159  iv. 
16.  lb  visvesaam;  2b  heptasyllabic  verse;  14a  dadhid?in;  18b 
nemdnaam ;  22c  area,  gdyd;  26a  srdyisthah;  27a  tud-utdh;  33b 
yacchd;    42c  si  one ;    46a  mdrtiah,  §  151   iii. 

17.  6b  sdcid;  7b  hybrid  verse  :  but  see  §  130  iv ;  7d  Pentad  verse  ; 
9a  sd,  §  175  i ;  10c  requires  correction,  §  225 ;  12a  Rest  at  the  fourth 
place,  but  see  §  151  i:  13b  ajurid  (§  151  ii)  seems  unlikely:  hence  ir- 
regular Rest,  cf.  §  227  iii  6;  15a,  15b  extra  verses  to  14.  18.  Id  vardhd; 
3c  nu;  7a  jdnvmd  (plur.) ;  7b  perhaps  dmartena;  9c  dhisva;  12a  read 
prd  tuvidyumnd-  sthdvirasya,  §  152  ii.  19.  2a  evd;  2d  Viratsthana 
verse;  3c  yiithdm  'va,  §  129.  3d  the  position  of  the  caesura  is 
uncertain  :  perhaps  indrabhi  jj  dvavHsu'  djau  ;  6a  bhara ;  7 'd  jigivdrhsah, 
tuotah;  10b  as  2d;  lOd  dhdah;  12c  perhaps  prthvidm,  §  151  iii; 
13d  tuotah. 

20.  la  dyauly.  bhuma  with  hiatus;  2b  asurydm:  Gautami  verse, 
§  226  iii  b  ;  2d  Viratsthana  verse  ;  3d  purdam;  4a  irregular  cadence  ; 
4d  caesura  after  the  third  syllable ;  6c  as  2d  ;  7a  Rest  at  the  fourth 
place ;  7b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place ;  7c  probably  Viratsthana  verse,  but 
cf.  §§  149  iv,  151  i;  7d  probably  Viratsthana  verse,  but  cf.  §  149  iii; 
8c  probably  sasvadibham  in  one  word;  10b  long  ninth  syllable:  the 
occurrence  is  not  sufficient  evidence  of  an  adverb  end',  lOd  probably  as 
7a  :  but  see  §  151  i ;  11a  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type) ;  lie  -vdstuam  : 
13a  as  11a  ;  13c  tubhya. 

21.  2a  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type) ;  2b  Viratsthana  verse ;  3b 
vayunavat,  cf.  iv  51   lb;  6b  srutia;  6c  as  2b  j  6d  evd,  vidmd,  tua  ;  7r 

a.  20 


306  Metrical  Commentary 

yujia  ;  8a  as  2a ;  8b  as  2b  ;  8d  d-isiau,  where  a  represents  &amp;.  22.  2a 
u ;  3d  bJiard;  6c  Viratsthana  verse;  7a  probably  ndvyasid,  §  139  i; 
9c  dhisvti.  23.  5a  vavdna  gives  a  hypersyllabic  break,  §219:  perhaps 
read  vdvna  or  vena  ;  Gd  kriydsma:  this  form  is  suspicious  in  this  hymn  : 
perhaps  kardma  ;  8a  probably  mandasva. 

24.  2c  nardam;  3a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  ;  3cntt;  4c  vatsdnaam; 
5a  adyd ;  5d  pari-etd,  -d  being  shortened  before  a  vowel ;  6d  Pentad  or 
Gautami  verse;  7d  GautamI  verse,  §  226  iii  a:  see  also  §  151  iii ;  8b 
sdtva,  §  178;  9c  uti,  4  being  shortened,  §  173:  dris-,  §  167  iv ;  10b 
Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type).  25.  lc  su;  Id  as  24  6d ;  2a  perhaps 
drisanyann,  §  167  iv;  3a  extended  Tristubh  verse;  3c  tudm  esaain. 

26.  la  GautamI  verse;  2b  gddhia;  2c  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224, 
cf.  7c;  5c  probably  Viratsthana  verse:  for  possible  ddasa  see  §  151  i; 
7c  tudyd  and  as  2c:  but  see  on  stu,  §  151  iii;  8b  prdyisthdh;  8c  the 
last  half  of  the  verse  is  entirely  unrhythmical :  perhaps  read  ksatra-  astu 
-srdyisthah  with  divided  compound,  cf.  §  152  ii. 

27.  3a  nahi  nU ;  4a  tidt ;  5b  probably  a  compound  abhydvarti- 
cdyamdndya,  cf.  8c:  see  also  §  151  iii;  7b  sU;  8b  mdhya.  *28.  2b 
sudm ;  3d  jibk ;  6c  kpiuthd;  7a  suydvasam  ;  7d  rudardsya,  §  149  ii. 
29.  2b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  2c  irregular  cadence ;  5b  tu  ;  6b  uti 
with  long  final  vowel,  §  173  i. 

30.  la  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  Id  rodasl  'bhe,  §  128  ii ;  2a 
asurydm',  2d  possibly  uruyd,  §  178;  3b  dbhiah;  ibjidydn;  5a  Rest  at 
the  fifth  place.  31.  2a  tudt :  Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type) ;  3d 
dviver  dpdmsi ;  4c  sdcid ;  4e  extra  verse ;  5d  srdvayd.  32.  4b 
mahdbhih,  §  178. 

33.  la  Viratsthana  verse  ((indra  type);  lb  dadsvdn;  2b  caesura 
after  the  third  syllable ;  2d  tuotdh ;  3d  nfndam ;  4c  Viratsthana  verse. 
34.  Id  ukiha-arkd.  35.  2a,  3a  Viratsthana  verses  (indra  type).  36. 
Id  asurydm;  5a  s'rutia;  5b  diauh.  37.  2a  prd  u  with  hiatus;  2b,  3c 
fjiantah,  §  151  ii.  38.  4b  perhaps  brdhmd  (plur.).  39.  5b  pinvd. 
40.  la  tubhya;  2a  pibd.  41.  5a  probably  Viratsthana  verse;  5d  avd. 
42.    3  c  veda. 

44.  4a  tidm  u;  4c  visvdsdham,  §  170  ii  6,  or  rather  visvasdham;  7-9 
for  the  metre  see  §  249  i ;  7a,  8a,  8b,  8c,  8d,  9b,  9d  Pentad  verses ; 
7b,  7c  Gautami  verses;  9a  Viratsthana  verse ;  7c  sasanvdn;  7d  probably 
bhavat,  giving  a  Pentad  verse;  8c  ndmd  (plur.);  8d  venydh  (y  cons.); 
9c  krnuhl  or  more  probably  krdlii,  giving  a  Pentad  verse;  lOd  tud; 
lid  jahi,  §  173  i;  13b  bhard;  14a  puru  plur.,  §  159  iv;  15a  Viratsthana 
verse  (indra  type);  16a  tidt :  Viratsthana  verse,  but  see  §  149  iii; 
21c  pipdya;    22c  sudsy  a. 

45.  5b  dudyoh;  7c  gdam,  §  142  ii ;  9b  jdndnaam  ;  9c  vrhd ; 
10b  vdjdnaam;  16b  krstlndam;  17 cmrlayd;  18a  dhisvd;  19a  raylndam ; 
22a  gdyd  ;  29b  stotfndam:  catalectic  verse  ;  31b  asthaat. 

46.  2c  gdam,  §  142  ii ;  4a  vrsabho  'va,  §  129  ii ;  5d  d  ubhe  :  prdah  ; 
8a  druhydv,  §  170  ii  e;  9c  yacchd:  mdhya;  lib  ava,  §  175  ii ; 
lid  perhaps  -miirdhanah,  §  170  ii  c;  12b  sdrmd;  12c  yacchd:  the 
latter  part  of  the  verse  is  very  irregular :  tanve  is  not  without  parallels 
(§  135  6),  but  on  the  whole  a  hybrid  verse  with  long  ninth  syllable  is 
more  probable:  cchadih;  12d  for  dvesah,  dvisam  should  probably  be 
restored. 


vi  22-67  307 

47.  See  p.  4-4 ;  lc  iitd  nd;  2b  ydsya  with  hiatus;  2c  perhapt 
cyautand,  §  149  iv  j  3d  ydbhiah  ;  6a  pibd  ;  9a  Viratsthana  verse  {indra 
type);  9b  s'atavan  needs  correction,  perhaps  to  sahdvan  for  saha*&lt;&lt; ,-,,,,, 
cf.  i  91  23b;  9c  isdam;  10a  mrla  :  mdhya;  10b  coda  yd  ;  14c  probably 
wn2,  §  160  i;  16d  manusyhn  (y  cons.),  §  135a;  17c  -dhunudndh; 
18c,  18d  extended  Tristubh  verses;  23a  aW  dsudn,  §  145  ii  6 ; 
23c  oasa,  catalectic  verse;  24b  gdahy  §  142  ii :  irregular  cadence; 
*28e  sd  imdm ;  *29a  svasayd ;  *29b,  *30c  extended  Tristubh  verses ; 
*31b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  *31c  extended  Pentad  verse  ($  227  iii  a), 
probably  to  be  corrected. 

48.  4d  vdjam  utd  with  Sandhi,  §  130  iv  :  rdsvd,  vamsud;  6e,  7e 
extra  verses;  8a  visvasaam;  8e,  15e  extra  verses;  16b  nU  ;  17c  requires 
correction,  perhaps  evdtha :  see  also  §  151  i;  17d  vaydh,  §  151  i;  18a 
drier  'va ;  21a  dydam;  21e  extra  verse  :  jydyistham.  49.  5c  naasatyd 
with  Sandhi;  6b  dpia  ;  7a  citrd-ayuh;  8c  candrd-agrdh ;  lib  gantd; 
12c  tanui,  §  158  iv;  15a  mf ;  15e  extra  verse. 

50.  4d  dhudma,  §  142  iii  6 ;  7b  dhdtd;  9c  aratnau  (BR.):  perhaps 
craia  d,  cf.  *i  24  15c,  ii  28  2a,  and  for  the  metre  i  60  4c,  vii  42  4c; 
13d  diaiih;  15c  gndah,  §  142  ib  ;  15d  bhuuta.  51.  2b  devdn,  gen.  pi., 
§151  iii;  2c  rju  (plur.);  2d  Viratsthana  verse;  less  probably  suurah, 
§  151  i;  3a  u;  4a  Viratsthana  verse;  5a  diauh;  7c  ksdyathd ;  9b 
caesura  after  the  third  syllable;  10a  srdyistha-,  u ;  12d  perhaps 
vasuyuh,  §  168  iii. 

52.  See  p.  44;  5b  nu;  14a  see  §  135:  but  perhaps  yajniydsah, 
and  so  as  the  next  two  verses;  14b,  14c  Irypersyllabic  verses,  §  224; 
14b  apdam.  53.  4b  cinuhi ;  5c,  6c,  7c  asmdbhy a;.  6b  icchd;  7a  rikhd; 
8d  extra  verse.  54.  3c  nd;  10a  pardstaat,  §  151  i.  55.  3b,  4a 
ajdsua.  56.  6b  updvasu  is  probable,  §  166  via;  6d  extra  verse. 
58.     2a  ajdsua.       59.     2a  vaam;    9b  tYmt  (plur.). 

60.  lc  vasavia  exceptionally,  §  151  ii ;  4a  heptasyllabic  verse; 
13a  indra-  with  -a  shortened  before  vowel,  cf.  §  174  i  a:  also  agni, 
§  174  ib;  13c  isdam;  14b  vasavyaih,  §  135.  61.  2b  sanu  (plur.); 
3c,  10b  catalectic  verses;  lib  uru  is  unlikely,  §  160  i;  13b  anydh 
ace.  pi.       62.     6a  adbhidh. 

63.  la  -huta,  §  174  i  a;  lc  naasatyd;  Id  prdyisthdh;  2b  Pentad 
verse ;  2c  Viratsthana  verse  with  irregular  cadence,  perhaps  requiring 
correction;  2d  nd  'not'  with  hiatus;  3a  Viratsthana  verse ;  3d  a-aiijan, 
%  121  c  :  cf.  vii  79  4d,  and  a-arksd,  a-urva-,  §  151  i;  4c  Rest  at  the 
fourth  place;  7a  perhaps  dsuasah,  §151  ii ;  8a  puru-  puru-  bhujd, 
§  160  i ;  day  imam;  8c  mddhui;  9c  daat ;  10b  dsvanaam;  10c  vira, 
see  §174ii;  11a  extra  verse  to  stanza  10. 

64.  2a  perhaps  uruyd ;  4c  valid  ;  5a  sd  d  vahd  yd  probably,  sd,  and 
yd  having  the  vowels  shortened.  65.  la  sid ;  3c  maghdvanlh  or 
maghdvanlh ;  3d  dhdtd  ;  4d  smd  ;  5a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place. 

66.  lc  pipdya;  2b  duih;  Sbcauiiit:  Viratsthana  verse  ;  3c  Pentad 
or  Gautami  verse ;  3d  sd  it ;  5c  probably  read  aydaso  mahimnd, 
§  151  i,  iii;  6d  Pentad  verse;  8b  dvathd ;  9c,  10c  Rests  at  the  fifth 
place.  67.  la  satdant ;  lc  rasmd  'va;  Id  dud  :  jdnd  dual  with  hiatus  ; 
4c  possibly  mahdna  or  mahdd,  §  178;  6d  d  atan,  dydam  ;  8c  ghrtaanna, 
$  174  ia;  9a  spuurdhdn,  §  151  i;  9b  dhdmd  (plur.).;  9d  dpia ;  10a 
Viratsthana  verse;  10c  Pentad  verse;  11a  chadisah;  lie  Pentad  verse. 

20—2 


308  Metrical  Commentary 

68.  2a  srdyisthd:  irregular  cadence ;  2b  surdnaam;  perhaps  savistha, 
§  174  ii;  2c  maghonaam  or  Gautami  verse;  4a  gndah,  §  142  i;  4b  nardam; 
4c  probably  prd  ebhyah  with  hiatus ;  4d  diauh  or  dydva  :  Rest  at  the 
fourth  place  :  prthivl ;  5b  varuna  ;  5c  dadsvan  ;  Pentad  verse  ;  7a  pro- 
bably Gautami  verse,  but  see  §  1 49  iii ;  7c  yesaam  or  sasahvtin  j 
7d  perhaps  tdrutrah,  §  169  v;    8a  nU  u ;    9b  drcd. 

71.  6a  adyd;  6b  asmdbhya;  6c  ksdyasi  (H.  Oldenberg).  72.  The 
extended  Tristubh  verses  lb,  lc,  2b,  3b  are  not  necessarily  indications 
of  late  date  :  they  may  be  connected  with  uneven  lyric  metre.  See  on 
viii  35,  §  242  iv ;  2c  dydam ;  5b  srutia.  *74.  la  asurydm. 
*75.  3d  jid  with  hiatus;  9b  sdktivantah,  §  168  ii ;  14a  dhir  'va ; 
1 4b  jidyah ;  16b  sdravye,  §  135a;  17e  visvdhd:  extra  verse  ;  18b  for 
the  caesura  see  §  205  ic;  18c  hybrid  verse;  19a  sudh  :  heptasyllabic 
verse  ;  19c  semi-cadence  of  Epic  Anustubh. 


Mandala  VII. 

[The  great  majority  of  the  hymns  are  characterized  by  an  approxi- 
mation of  the  trimeter  rhythm  to  that  of  dimeter  verse,  as  described  in 
§  213.  The  name  of  Vasistha  and  the  characteristic  refrain  verse  are 
however  found  even  in  the  hymns  which  have  not  this  metrical  type, 
and  are  therefore  probably  of  a  different  period  :  see  §  107.] 

1.  3a  prd-iddhah:  perhaps  dldihi;  3b  su-urmia ;  5b  su-apatydm, 
sahasia;  7a  dahd ;  8c  utd;  13a, pdhi;  15b  Viratsthana  verse:  but  such 
verses  are  so  rare  in  this  collection  that  they  invite  emendation ; 
16a  8(1;  18a  irtid;  18c  viantu;  19b  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  ic; 
20d  pdtd. 

2.  lc  sprsd;  6c  perhaps  barhih-sddd,  §  178;  7c  for  the  caesura  see 
§  213  ii.  3.  Id  ghrtd-anna;  2d  smd  ;  3c  di&amp;m  or  dydam  ;  4a  perhaps 
prthvi&amp;m,  §  151  iii;  4b  trsii,  §  160  i;  7a  dasema;  8d  sumdt;  9c  mdtroh: 
this  is  a  very  unusual  measurement,  see  §  139  vi. 

4.  2c  perhaps  sucidantah,  §  151  iii;  2d  bhurl  (plur.);  3b  mdrtidsah, 
§  151  iii :  Pentad  verse  ;  6d  md  with  hiatus  :  extended  Tristubh  verse  ; 
8d  abhisdt,  §  167  iii.  5.  la  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  3a  tudt;  6a  tue, 
§  173:  asurydm;  9b  srutia.  6.  2a  see  on  vii  1  15b:  dhaasim  is 
possible  ;  2b  rodaslyoh ;  3c  Pentad  verse ;  7d  d  with  hiatus.  8.  la 
aridh,  §  151  ii:  the  interpretation  is  doubtful;  Id  a  with  hiatus; 
2a  probably  u  sid,  but  the  rhythm  is  irregular;  5a  tve,  §  173. 
9.     2c  mandard  is  just  possible,  §  149  iii :    visdam. 

11.  lb  ndrte  tudt ;  5 a,  valid.  12.  Id  prati-dncam ;  3c  vdsti  (plur.). 
13.  lc  prinandh;  3c  iria.  15.  1 3b  smd  ;  14c  perhaps  puuh,  §  151  i. 
16.  3a  asthaat ;  4a  tad ;  4d  rdsvd,  tua ;  5c  catalectic  verse ;  7a  tue, 
§173;  8c  sahasia;  11a  -ddah,  §  142  i;  lie  as  5c.  17.  la  bhdva; 
5a  vdmsva. 

18.  Id  vdsu  (plur.);  4a  suydvase;  22a  due ;  22b  vadhumantd  is 
possible,  §  218  iv.  19.  2a  indara,  §  149  i  a;  5c  satatamdm  a-  with 
Sandhi,  §  130  iv;    9a  nu. 

20.  2a  indarah;  2d  vdsu  (plur.);  3d  satruydntam,  §  168  iii; 
6a  for  the  caesura  see  §  214  ii;    7b  dayisndm;   7c  perhaps  dmarta; 


vi  68-vii  59  309 

7d  §  213  ii.     21.    3c  tudt;  5a,  6a  indara;  9a  irregular  cadence  (§  220  v) 
is  improbable  in  this  collection  :  perhaps  read  sydma  ta  indra  vi. 
sdkhayah:   for  the  opening  cf.  20  8d.      22.     la  indara;    3&lt;;  brdkmd; 
6a,  6b  bhtiri,  probably  an  adverb  with  plural  form;  6c  rod  with  hiatus: 
jiok;  8c  as  la.       24.     4b  perhaps  brdhma  (plur.);  6c  pinvd. 

25.  lc  bahvoh  (v  cons.),  §  139  v;  Id  visudriak,  §  166  iv  ; 
2b  mdrtidsah,  §  151  iii;  2c  krnuhl;  2d  bhard ;  3c  jahi,  §  162.  26. 
5b  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  iv  a.  27.  2d  pdrlvrta  probably,  §  167  i ; 
4c  pipdya;  5c  vidntah.  28.  la  brdhma,  see  §  175  i ;  3b  Viratsthana 
verse,  probably  requiring  correction  ;  4d  the  metre  requires  mayinah. 
29.     la  indara,  tubhya  ;  2c  s4  ;  3a  su-uktaih  ;  dbdasema;  4a  utd  glid. 

31.  4c  viddhi  td,  §  162  iv ;  5c  tue,  §  173  v.  32.  9a  sredhatd ; 
10a  sudadsah;  12c  hypersyllabic  opening,  requiring  correction,  §  217  ; 
15a  smd  ;  21c  tubhya;  2A&amp;  probably  abhi  mtdh,  §  167  iii;  25a  catalectic 
verse  :   perhaps  read  amitridn  ;  26b  putrebhiah. 

*33.  2d  avriiita,  §  175  i;  8c  nd  'niena,  §  145  vi;  10c  jdnma,  utd: 
the  double  hiatus  in  this  hymn  is  suspicious.  34.  7b  prthvi,  §  151  iii; 
12b  krnotd;  14b  prdyisthah;  16a  abjdam  (§  142  i)  gives  an  irregular 
opening;  1 7a  Viratsthana  verse ;  21b  Tristubh  verse.  *35.  See  p.  44  ; 
6c  rudarebhih,  §  149  ii;  13c  perhaps  apdam;  14d  gdvajatah  (§  142  ii) 
or  ye  gojdtdh. 

36.  3d  sdsmin ;  5c  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  iv  a ;  5d  rudardya, 
§  149  ii:  prdyistha.  37.  3a  dayisndm ;  3d  vasavyd ;  4a  sud-yasah; 
4c  ddsudmsah  ;  8c  read  payur  dividh.  38.  2a  u,  tistJid  ;  2d  suvandh, 
see  §  140  iii ;  6a  jdaspdtih,  §  142  i  :  long  ninth  syllable,  as  also  in  7c; 
8a  avata.  39.  3b  emendation  seems  required,  as  Sandhi  combination 
of  a  locative  from  an  -u  stem  seems  unknown  :  cf .  §§  1 20,  1 30  iii, 
170  ii  e,  219  ;    4d  ndasatya ;    5a  d  with  hiatus  ;    5b  vaha. 

40.  la  d  u  with  hiatus,  §  171  ii ;  2c  rdyiknah  (§  151  i)  is  certain, 
but  the  form  is  unexplained;  5a  probably  vaydyai,  cf.  i  165  15c; 
6d  vdatah,  §  142  v.  41.  Id  catalectic  verse;  3c  janaya ;  5a  evd; 
6d  either  rdtham  'va,  §  129  iii,  or  omit  dsvdh  as  a  gloss,  §  152  i. 
42.  3c  sd :  puru-anika ;  4b  siona- ;  6a  evd  with  hiatus;  6b  astaut, 
§  151  i.  43.  2c  strnitd ;  4d  gantana ;  5b  dsakrah,  §  151  iii. 
45.  2c  sd.  46.  lb  probably  devaya  ksiprd-  ^  isave ;  2a  ksdmia ; 
2d  rudara,  §  149  ii;  4c  bhajd.       48.     la  Viratsthana  verse;  4b  bhutd. 

*50.  la  mdam  (§151  i)  or  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  4  two 
Tristubh  verses  must  be  restored  at  the  beginning  of  the  stanza; 
4a  perhaps  ends  udvdto  va  ;  4b  read  sdnti  for  ydh  ;  4e  extra  verse  : 
nadydh,  §  135  b.  52.  3c  Pentad  verse.  53.  3a  utd.  54.  Id  bhava: 
extended  Tristubh  verse.  *55.  The  four-syllable  verse  in  each  of  the 
stanzas  2-4  is  without  parallel  in  the  popular  Eigveda,  see  §192; 
7c  sahasyena  (y  cons.),  §  135  a  ;    8c  catalectic  verse. 

56.  3b  vdtasvandsah ;  6a  ydyisthdh ;  8b  probably  munir  'va ; 
9b  perhaps  ma  durmatir -  vah  ;  10a  ndma  (plur.);  10b  Tristubh  verse; 
11a  sua-;  14c  ddmia ;  17a  mflantu  with  long  ninth  syllable; 
18a  Viratsthana  verse;  20d  dhaitd;  21c  vasavye;  22d  bhutd  ;  23a 
bhdrl,  cakra,  §§  159  iv,  158  i;  24b  jdnanaam.  57.  lb  Rest  at  the 
fifth  place  ;  2d  sadatd  ;  5c  no  'vata  ;  6b  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  iv  a  ; 
Qdjigrtd.  58.  4d  dayisndm;  6a  Viratsthana  verse,  or  (with  Lanman) 
avdci ;     6b    su-uktdm.       59.     4b   dradhuam ;     4d   ydtd ;     5a    d    ii   .sd ; 


310  Metrical  Commentary 

6d  -adhuai ;   8b  extended  Tristubh  verse ;    8c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place ; 
*12c-to'w,  §  129  iii. 

60.  la  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  iv  a;  2d  rju  (plur.);  9a  hotardbhih, 
§149  iii;  9b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  12a  devd.  61.  la  varund; 
Id  §  214  ii;  3d  yatb  y  -nimisam;  6d  brdhmd  (plur.).  62.  lb  jdnimd 
(plur.);  4a  trdsithdm,  §  170  i;  6a  nu  u.  63.  la,  2a  u;  3c  see  §  177  i. 
65.  la  su-uktaih;  lc  asurydm.,  jydyistham ;  2a  td  for  td  dual, 
§  174  i  a. 

66.  2a  catalectic  verse;  2c  asurydya ;  3a  tanupdd,  §  142  i; 
8b,  8c  iydm  is  a  monosyllable,  §  151  iii;  12b  su-uktaih;  13c  succhadis-; 
19a  perhaps  mitra  varuna.  67.  2b  upa ;  5b  as  60  la;  9b  probably 
rayind,  §  139.  68.  2a  madia;  3c  as  60  la;  8d  starydm,  §  135  6. 
69.     3a  perhaps  &amp;  suasvd  yasdsd  ;    5a  vdstav,  §  170  ii  e 

70.  5b  caksathe,  §  170  i;  6a  naasatyd.  71.  2d  mddhui;  trdsithdm. 
72.  3c  for  the  Sandhi  see  §  128  iii.  73.  3a  pathdam.  74.  5d 
asmdbhya. 

75.  3a  tie;  3b  usdsah,  §  170  ii  a;  4a  sia:  catalectic  Bhargavi 
verse,  requiring  correction,  §  227  iii  b ;  8b  dsvavat,  §  168  ii.  77.  la 
upa;  4d  coddyd  ;  5d  dsvavat.  78.  Id  asmdbhya ;  o&amp;  adyd.  79.  4a 
asmdbhya  ;  4c  vrsabhdsya,  §  175  i ;   4d  a-urnoh,  §  121  c  :  cf.  vi  63  3d. 

80.  2a  sicl  81.  law;  5d  rasvd;  6b  asmdbhya.  82.  2a  requires 
correction  somewhat  as  follows  :  samrdd  vdm  anyd  anyd  ucyate  svardt : 
but  cf.  §  151  iii;  6b  sudm.  83.  7b  perhaps  yuyudhuh,  §  169  iii. 
84.     2a  rdstardm,  §  149  iii;    3c  upa.       85.     2d  sdrud;    4b  adityd. 

86.  3b  upa ;  4a  jydyistham ;  4d  emendation  is  required,  perhaps 
tareyam  from  tar,  tur :  but  see  §§  130  i,  151  iii.  87.  2b  sasanvdn; 
2c  for  the  Sandhi  see  §  128  ii;  2d  dhama ;  6b  Pentad  verse; 
7a  mfldyati.  88.  3c  sdnubhih,  §  1 5 1  iii ;  3d  for  the  caesura  see 
§  205  iv  a;    6c  probably  requires  correction.       89.     la  md  sU. 

90.  lc  vdha ;  2b  tubhya ;  3a  as  87  2c;  4a  usdsah,  §  170  ii  a ; 
5c,  etc.  indrdvdyu.  91.  2c,  etc.  indrdvdyu  ;  3d  su-apatydni  ; 
5d  prinand.  92.  lc  upa  ;  3a  ddsudmsam  ;  4a  indara- ;  5a  extended 
Tristubh  verse.  93.  lb,  etc.  indra-agni;  Id  dhdyistha;  3a  upa; 
3c  kdsthaam,  §  142  i;  4d  dayisnaih;  6a  u  su;  6c  nU  d  :  -a^Aa  for  -dthe, 
§  174  i  e.  94.  9b  dsvavat,  §  168  ii;  10c  sdptivanta,  ib. ;  12d  extra 
verse. 

95.  6a  u:  6c  vdrdha.  96.  la  i7;  lb  dsuriye  (vocative)  or  (as 
Bollensen)  asuriydm ;  2c  Bhargavi  verse,  perhaps  requiring  cor- 
rection. 97.  3a  jydyistham ;  3b  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  iv  a ; 
5d  anarvdnam,%  170  iic;  6a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  7c  su-dvesdh; 
9a  as  3b.  98.  lb  juhotana;  6a  pasavydm  (y  cons.),  §  135  a. 
99.     lc  vidmd;    3d  prthvim,  §  151   iii. 

100.  la  perhaps  ntt  u  mdrtiah ;  3a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place.  101, 
102.  See  p.  45.  101.  4b  trayidhd.  102.  2c  purusinaam.  *103.  5a 
esaam;  8a  extended  Tristubh  verse.  *104.  3a  catalectic  verse; 
6d  nrpdtl  yva  ;  11a  sd;  13a  nd,  §  175  ii ;  15a  hypersyllabic  verse, 
§224;  15b  tatdpa,  §  158  i;  18b  grbhdydtd;  19a  vartayd;  19d  jahl ; 
20c  -ebhiah;  2 2d  mrnd;  2iajahi;  25a  caksvd,  caksua. 


vii  60-viii  16  311 


Mandala  VIII. 

A.  VIII  1-11.  [Kanva  collections,  §  108 :  but  with  more 
variety  of  metre  than  is  found  elsewhere.] 

1.  2b  gdam,  §  142  ii ;  5b  dayiyam,  §  142  iii  a;  10a  adyd ; 
10c  dniani  if  the  word  is  correct;  16c  perhaps  tvd  with  hiatus: 
otherwise  long  ninth  syllable;  19d  hinudndm,  §  147;  21c  visvesaam; 
23a  mdtsud ;  26c  either  rasinah  iydm  with  Sandhi  (§  130  i),  or  hybrid 
verse,  cf.  also  §  151  iii;  28c  bhadh,  §  142  v;  30a  irregular  cadence, 
gha  (§  158  v)  being  unexampled;  30c  -jidh,  §  148  i;  32a  mdhya; 
32b  perhaps  liiranydyl,  §  139  iii;   *34c  abhicdksid. 

2.  3b  srindntah;  lib  srinihi;  13b  sitit  tvdvatah ;  13c  u;  15b  daah, 
§  152  iii  a,  or  catalectic  verse;  20a  md  sti  adyd;  22a  sifted  ;  22b  vidmd, 
§  158  i;  26a  pdatd,  §  142  i;  28b  heptasyllabic  verse;  28d  extra  verse; 
30b  tubhya  :  catalectic  verse,  but  see  §  151  iii ;  32b  purfi-  puru-  hutdh, 
§  160  i ;  35c  vdsu  plural ;  38b  purutmdnam,  §  170  ii  c  ;  40b  kdnudm. 

3.  4c  sd;  6d  svdndsah;  10c  sd;  12c  probably  sagdhi,%  162  iv.; 
11a  tud ;  13c  nahi  nu ;  2  Id  extra  verse*:  upeva  requires  correction; 
22b  -praam,  §  142  i.  *24.  This  is  probably  a  Pankti  verse  ;  24a  Epic 
semi-cadence;  24c  trochaic  semi-cadence;  24d  read  pdkasthdmdnam 
abravam. 

4.  7a  catalectic  verse;  14a  vdvatd  requires  correction;  16br&lt;ft&gt;va; 
19a  mtdsuam,  §  145  ii  b ;  20a  kdnud ;  21b  gdam,  §  142  ii. 

5.  13c  md;  29a  vaam,  §  151  i;  31a  perhaps  parakdat,  §  151  i; 
31b  asndnta,  §  174  ia;  32c  ndasatyd ;  35b  probably  catalectic  verse: 
or  dhtaih,  §  151  ii ;  35c  as  32c;  37b  perhaps  vididtam,  §  147  i; 
37d  ustrdnaam;  39a  gaat,  §  142  iii  a. 

6.  18a,  20a  tud;  31c  utd;  33a  brahmanid,  cf.  §  151  ii ;  39a 
mdndasva  ;  46b  pdrsav,  §  170  ii  e.  7.  2b  probably  dcidhuam,  §  151  ii; 
lie  tu;  14b  as  2b;  18a  dvd,  §  158  i;  21a  sma;  26c  diauh;  32a  sa/m 
0*2  ;  32c  -vdsibhih,  §  170  iii ;  33a  d  u  sd;  33c  vavrtidm  (cf.  §  147  i),  or 
catalectic  verse. 

8.  12d  probably  anusatam,  §  170  i;  15a  ndsatid;  17b  probably 
purubhuja,  §  166  iv;  19c  vipanyu  is  possible,  §  174  ii ;  23d  jivebhiah. 
9.  lc  prthu  cchadlh;  6b  devd:  9a  naasatya  ;  15a  ndsatid,  or  catalectic 
verse.  10.  2c  perhaps  visvddevdn,  §  178;  3a  tid;  4a  catalectic  verse; 
5d  dthd  with  long  fifth  syllable,  §  158  v;  6a  purubhuja.  11.  2a 
prasdsiah ;  3b  catalectic  verse ;  4a  heptasyllabic  verse  ;  4b  perhaps 
mdrtiasya  ;  5b  bhurl  ndmd  (plur.);  7b  perhaps  sadhdsthaat,  §  151  i; 
10b  ndvia,  §  151  ii;    10c  sudm. 

B.  VIII  12-31.  [These  collections  are  almost  exclusively  in  lyric 
metres.  They  have  every  indication  of  antiquity  :  but  the  few  dimeter 
hymns  which  are  included  in  the  collection  appear  by  their  smoother 
rhythm  to  be  later  additions.] 

12.  icyenanu;  19c  ddha ;  28c,  29c,  30c  trimeter  verses.  13.  9a 
utd;  13c  is  a  trimeter  verse,  though  with  dimeter  rhythm,  as  nah  is 
unaccented;  15c  as  13c;  19d  sd;  21a  perhaps  yddl;  25a  vdrdhasva 
sU;  28c  utd;  30d  viedksid;  31b  utd.  14.  2a  irregular  cadence.^  15. 
la  u;  10c  su-apatydni ;  12a  tud.       16.     3a  sustutid  or  sustuti  d;    6a 


312  Metrical  Commentary 

drianti,  §  145  iii  •  7b  purU-  puru-  hutdh,  §  160  i;  lib  svasti.  17.  lb 
the  text  for  once  gives  correctly  pibd  with  hiatus;  5c  grbhayti ;  11a 
catalectic  verse ;    1 4c  pur  dam  ;    1 4d  muninaam. 

18.  2b  dditidnaam ;  7b  uti  d  (for  uti  d)  is  the  more  probable  read- 
ing; lie  krnutd;  13c  suaih ;  15a  catalectic  verse;  16b  apdam;  18b 
dyu,  §  178;    22c  probably  dyu. 

19-22.  See  §  104  ii.  19.  4b  srdyistha- ;  4c  sd;  7b  urjaam;  10c 
sd;  14d  udno  'va,  §  129  ii ;  16b  ndsatia  ;  18a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place; 
18c  jigiuh,  §  151  ii ;  20d  vane/na;  24a  airayata,  §  175  i;  27  extra 
verses  to  26 ;  30a  sd ;  33a  two  additional  syllables  are  required  :  cf. 
§  226  4a :  perhaps  repeat  anye ;  34b  ndyathd :  maghfrnaam  belongs  to 
the  second  verse.  37.  This  stanza  must  certainly  have  been  Satobrhati 
originally,  perhaps  with  an  extra  dimeter  verse  :  but  the  original  form 
is  not  easily  restored.  For  the  first  verse  see  §  152  ii,  but  a  trimeter 
verse  is  required  ;  37d  praimyitd,  %  142  iii  b  ;  37e  diydnaam. 

20.  3b  marutaam;  6a  diauh;  9b  irregular  cadence;  14b  tesaam ; 
14c  ardnaam;  17c  the  first  part  of  the  verse  seems  to  be  defective; 
18d  probably  vavrdhuam,  §  151  ii ;  19c  gdyd :  24a  dvathd ;  25a 
dsiknidm. 

21.  4c  probably  dhdmd  :  otherwise  a  hybrid  verse;  8c  utd;  12c 
hdndma  is  probable,  §  178;  15b  tudvatah.  22.  la  d  u ;  2a  purva- 
with  internal  hiatus;  5d  ndsatia;  6c  adyd;  14c  hybrid  verse;  16c 
bhuutam,  §  142  iii  b ;    17a  dsvavat,  §  168  ii. 

23-26.  See  §  104  iii.  23.  la  fljsva;  3c  extended  Viratsthana 
verse;  4a  asthaat,  §  142  iii  a  :  5a  tisthd ;  7c  the  rhythm  is  very 
irregular,  and  emendation  is  desirable;  9c  upa  ;  lib  bhadh,  §  142  v; 
12a  urjaam  ;  12b  rdsvd  ;  12c  avd  ;  16a  probably  vasuvidam,  §  166  iv ; 
16b  aprindt ;  17a  tud  ;  21b  dvidhat,  §  169  vi ;  23b  jydyistha  ;  24a  area  ; 
24c  ddmia. 

24.  lib,  12a  tudt ;  14a  upa:  hdrlnaam;  14c  catalectic  verse;  15c 
nd  'not'  with  hiatus;  16b  sincd;  17c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  18a 
vdjdnaam;  19a  eta ;  23c  the  rhythm  is  irregular;  24b  perhaps 
parlvfjam,  §  167  i;  24c  as  23c;  28a  susdmane;  30  probably  in  its 
original  form  an  Usnih  verse ;  30a  perhaps  ydjamdnah ;  30c  esd : 
perhaps  omit  dpasritah. 

25.  la  gopddj  §  142  i;  3b  asurydya  ;  4a  perhaps  mitra  varuna  ; 
4b  deva,  §  174  ia;  5c,  7c  irregular  rhythm;  10b  ndasatyd ;  12c 
perhaps  sindhu,  §  170  ii/*;  13b  gopaydtiam  (§  136  i)  or  catalectic  verse  ; 
14a  apdam;  14c  midhudmsah;  17c  long  eleventh  syllable,  almost 
without  parallel,  §  220  iv;  1 8b  prthividh ;  1 8c  catalectic  verse  :  perhaps 
mahitvand ;  22a  uksaniayane,  §  136  i;  22b  perhaps  hdraydyane;  23a 
heptasyllabic  verse ;  23b  hdrlnaam  ;  23c  wtfa  ?iu  :  for  the  caesura  see 
§  205  iv  a;  24c  irregular  break,  easily  corrected  by  interchanging 
vdjind  and  drvantd  :    drvatd  is  also  possible. 

26.  2b  naasatyd;  3a  adyd;  7c  suvira,  §  174  ia;  8b  ndsatia ;  lib 
%&amp;£ ;  12c  mdhya;  13c  cakrdta,  §174  ie;  19c  -ydvand,  §  170  iic;  20, 
21,  25  :  it  is  probable  that  all  these  were  originally  Usnih  stanzas;  22c 
is  unrhythmical ;  23b  vdhasva ;  24c  for  possible  dsua-  see  §  151  ii. 

27.  5a  adyd ;  8a  ydtd ;  lid  dnidm  ;  12c  Bhargavi  verse ;  14c  adyd ; 
15d  dvidhat,  §  169  vi ;  20b  yem^  §  158  i;  21c  dhatthd.  28.  4a 
catalectic  verse  :  the  words  tdthed  asat  are  probably  a  gloss,  anticipating 


viii  17-52  313 

the  sense  of  the  next  verse  ;  5c  saptd.  29.  2a  diotanah,  g  15]  i 
omit  sucih,  §  152  i;  6a  pipdya;  8a  dud ;  9a  cakrata  dual,  §g  170  i, 
174  ie.  30.  For  the  metres  see  §  248  ii ;  3b  u;  3d  naitfd  ;  Id  *^//v* 
dsvdya.  31.  2a  catalectic  verse;  6b  asate,  §  170  i;  9d  extra  verse: 
devesu,  §175  i;  10c  heptasyllabic  verse;  lib  suasti;  13b  gopdah, 
§  142  i;  1 3c  pdnthaah,  §  142  ii;  14d  extra  verse;  15c  etc.  devdnaam. 

C.  VIII  32-59.  [This  part  of  the  Mandala  consists  of  Kanva 
hymns  and  others  of  the  same  period.  Hymn  46,  however,  has  a 
distinctively  archaic  character.] 

32.  6a  perhaps  yddl;  10c  sddhu,  §  160  i;  18b  dvrtah,  §  167  iv  ; 
19c  pibd;  24a  tu;  25c  long  fifth  syllable,  easily  corrected  by  reading 
pakvdm  gosu.  33.  4c  hdrioh;  6a  as  32  18b;  8c  tud ;  12b  vfsann, 
§  177  iii;  13d  brdhmd  (plur.)  ;  14a  rathesthdam,  §  142  i;  15b  dhisvti  ; 
*17c  utd.     34.    Id  etc.  yayd,  §  158  i;  12b  -dsuah,  §  145  ii  6. 

35-38.  See  §§  105  iii',  234  i&amp;.  35.  For  the  metre  see  §  242  iv  ;  5a 
yuvaso  'va,  §  129  ii;  13a  omit  -vantd  the  first  time,  §  152  ii ;  16a 
perhaps  brdhmd  (plur.);  19b  etc.  -dsuasya,  §  145  ii  b ;  24b  deva, 
§  174  i  a.  36.  See  §  247  iv;  4a  probably  prthividh.  38.  2a  -ydvand, 
§  170  ii  c. 

39-42.  See  §  109  iv.  39.  lb  perhaps  yajddhiai,  §  146  ii  ;  3a 
tubhya  ;  4e  -hutiai  ;  6b  apiciam  is  perhaps  a  gloss,  §  152  i :  mdrtdnaam  ; 
6c  -ddah,  §  142  i.  40.  Id  vilu  (plur.);  2c  nfndam;  3c  u;  4a  area; 
6d  vdsu  may  be  a  gloss,  §  152  i;  8c  indrdgnioh;  9a  indra  may  be  a 
gloss,  §  152  i;   10c,    lie  utd  nu.     41.    2b  pitfndam. 

44.  lib  smd;  16b  prthividh;  23b  sidh;  28a  tue,  §  173  v.  45.  8a 
abhlyujah,  §  167  iii;  lib  dsvavantah,  §  168  ii ;  22a  vrsabha,  §  175  i; 
26b  -bdhue,  §  151  ii,  or  restore  -bdhave ;  34b  dudyoh;  38a  as  22a. 

46.  For  the  metres  see  §  248  iii;  lb  pranayitah,  §  142  iii 6;  2b,  2c 
vidmd,  §  158  i;  3a  mahimdnam,  §  170  iic;  4c  pdanti;  10a  gavyd  srf ; 
lib  catalectic  verse;  14a  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224:  but  perhaps  gdyd 
belongs  to  14b,  and  mahd  should  be  omitted  there:  cf.  17b;  14c  srutia; 
15a  rdyiknah;  16a  visvesaam;  16b  requires  correction;  17b  Rest  at 
fourth  place:  or  omit  milhuse;  17c  omit  visvdmanusdm,  §  152  i; 
19c  probably  with  yiijia  (§  136  i)  as  hybrid  verse ;  19d  jydyistliam ; 
20a  defective  verse,  §  225;  20c  catalectic  verse;  22c  sydvlnaam; 
22e  gdvaam;  24d  abhuut;  25b  ydhi;  26a  vdstav  and  as  20c;  28a  add 
dsi:  see  also  §  151  iii;  28b  ghrtasndah,  §  142  i;  28c  rdjo-'sitam, 
§  130  i;  31c  omit  ddha,  §  152  i;  32a  heptasyllabic  verse;  32d,  32e 
-gopaah,  §  142  i. 

47.  See  p.  45;  7d  drddhuam.  *48.  4a  bhavd ;  5c  perhaps 
caritraat,  §  151  i;    6b  caksayd. 

49.  lb  area;  4c  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  4d  ksudrdm  'va, 
§  129  iii;  5b  hydndh,  §  151  iii;  7a  irregular  cadence,  cf.  50  7a; 
7b  prthividm.  50.  5c  suddanti,  §  145  vi ;  Qdpipetha;  7b  prthividm. 
51.  2d  tuotdh;  3e  ndvyasi,  §  139  iii;  6a  perhaps  vasu,  §  170  ii/; 
lOd  svdnasah,  §  140  iii.  52.  2a  perhaps  pfsadraye;  2b  svdne, 
§  140  iii;  4a  probably  requires  emendation:  ydsya  tudm  gives  an 
irregular  opening  and  break.  The  verse  may  be  easily  corrected  thus  : 
ydsya  stomesu  tudm  indra;    5b  probably  isdnakrt,  §  178;    6a  as  51  6a. 


314  Metrical  Commentary 

♦ 

53.     3a    visvesaam;    4a   ca,    §  171    ii;     7d   sasanvdmsah ;    8c   evti. 

54.  2d  matsud;    6d   sasanvdmsah ;    8a  the  verse  requires  correction. 

55.  4a  sthd.  56.  lc  diauh;  4a  M^ra.  57.  lc  naasatya;  4d 
ddsudmsam.      *58.     lc  y&lt;5  'niicdndh.      *59.     6a,  7a,  7d  hybrid  verses. 

D.  VIII  60-103.  [Short  collections  of  the  archaic  and  strophic 
periods.] 

60.  6a  probably  dldihi ;  7c  dahd ;  9a,  9b,  9d  probably  pdhi ; 
9c  urjaam;  10b  smd ;  12d  probably  vasuvidah  ;  13b  ddvidhuat, 
§  169  iv;  13c,  14a  perhaps  pratldhfse,  §  167  v;  16a  tua;  16d  tisthd  ; 
20a  vesti  requires  correction,  probably  to  visat ;  20d  sedhd.  61.  4a 
dpraml-satya  by  the  derivation ;  5c  vasuvidam ;  8c  hybrid  verse : 
cakrma,  §  158  i;  9a  dvidJiat ;  9c  tadyd ;  10b  yddl;  12a  yuyujmd ; 
17a  sudh-suah,  cf.  §  140  iii;    17b  trdsvd. 

62.  la  ^?ra  w,  §  171  ii;  7-9  for  the  metre  see  Ch.  ix.  App.  No.  53. 
63.  Id,  4d,  5d  extra  verses;  2c  brdhmd  (plur.)  is  probable;  4a  perhaps 
kavlvrdhdh,  §    166  via;    8a  u.        64.     la   catalectic  verse;    5a   tidni. 

65.  4a    mahimdnam,   §    170   iic;    5b    isdnakrt ;    5c   d  ihl ;    6a    tua. 

66.  5c  extended  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type);  6c  tvdm;  6d  ddyisthah; 
7a  hidh,  cf.  §  140  iii;  9c  kena  nU ;  13a  tue,  §  173  v  :  u  at  the  end  of 
the  verse  is  only  found  here,  §  160  iv.  67.  la  tidn;  5c  sthd;  15a  dpa 
sit;    19c  asmdbhya. 

68.  7d  krstindam )  9a  tuotdsah;  13b  pdnthaam;  14a  dud-dud; 
1 6a  catalectic  verse ;  1 6b  a-arkse  :  this  appears  to  be  the  original  form 
of  the  patronymic,  §  151  i:  catalectic  verse;  17a  catalectic  verse; 
17b  indra-ute.  69.  2d  dlienundam;  3b  srinanti ;  3c  devdnaam ; 
4b  area;  7d  perhaps  sdkhiuh,  §  151  ii ;  8a  heptasyllabic  verse; 
11a  Epic  Anustubh  semi-cadence.  70.  lc  visvdsaam;  5b  siuh; 
6c  avd;  7a  catalectic  verse;  7b  dlrghdyu,  §  170  ii/";  12c  dhdndnaam; 
13c  irregular  break,  suggesting  emendation.  71.  4b  perhaps  raydyah, 
§  139  i ;  4c  ddsudmsam;  6b  irregular  cadence;  6c  naya;  7c  mdrtidya, 
§  151  iii;   10b  heptasyllabic  verse;    13a  isdam;    13d  taniipdam,  %  142  i. 

72.  2a  catalectic  verse ;  6a  utd  nU ;  6b  dsvavat ;  7a  as  2a : 
10b  pdrijmanam,  §  170  ii  c ;  13b  rodaslyoh;  17a  perhaps  mitra 
varan  a,  §  166  i;  1 8a  utd  nfi.  74.  lc  dUria;  4b  jydyistham ; 
4c  heptasyllabic  verse;  10a  -praam,  §  142  i;  13a  catalectic  verse; 
14a  ?ndam,  §  151  i.  75.  2a  catalectic  verse;  8a  devdnaam;  8b  as  2a; 
lie  perhaps  iirukrt,  §  166  iv. 

76.  l&amp;midhuah;  12c  tanvdm,  §  135  b.  77.  lie  rdnia.  78.  2a 
bhard ;  2c  probably  hiraiiydyi,  §  139  iii;  lOd  piirdhi.  79.  3a  tudm; 
4b  pHhvydh,  §  151  iii;  7a  mfhiyakuh;  9a  sne ;  9c  rdjann,  §  177  iii. 

80.  5a  hdnta  u  nd,  §  171  ii ;  8a  bhaag,  §  151  i.  81.  2c  probably 
catalectic  verse,  but  see  §  149  iii ;  3b  the  same,  or  martidsah,  §  151  iii ; 
4a  eta ;  6a  bhard ;  8a  ii  nti  ;  9a  catalectic  verse.  82.  la  dravd ; 
4a  tU;  6a  srudhi.  83.  6b  ddhvan.  84.  la  prdyistham :  hepta- 
s}Tllabic  verse  ;    6b  asmdbhya.       85.     la,  9a  naasatya. 

88.  5b  dntebhiah.  89.  4a  bhard ;  5d  dydam ;  6d  jdntuam. 
90.  2b  isdnakrt,  §  178  ;  2c  yujia;  4b  6AifrI  (plur.);  5c  hypersyllabic 
verse,  §  224 :  but  it  may  easily  be  corrected  to  tvdm  vrtrd  hamsi ; 
6c  catalectic  verse.       *91.     lb  §  120;  Id,  le  tua;    3a  Epic  Anustubh 


vlii  53-ix  21  :;i:&gt; 

semi-cadence;  3c  sdnair  'va,  §  129  ii,  but  some  correction  i  required  ; 
7  c  as  3a. 

92.  la  pdantam,  §  142  iii  a;  3b  vdjdnaam;  5a  m;  7a  tidm  u: 
satrdsdham,  §  170  ii  b;  8a  anarvdnam,  §  170  ii  c ;  9b  probably  purd 
plural;  30b  vdjdnaam;  31a  indrdbhi.  93.  3b  dsvavat,  §  168  ii  ■  t In- 
verse may  readily  be  corrected  to  gomad  ydvamad  d&amp;vavat ;  5c  utd ; 
21a  abhi  stt  ;  31b  ydhi  :  maddnaam  ;  33a  read  tvdrii  hi  wtrahan  esaam, 
§  177  iii ;  33b  somdnaam.  94.  2a  catalectic  verse,  or  read  updstha  d; 
6a  utd  nu  ;  8a  adyd ;  8b  dev&amp;naam ;  10a  etc.  tidn  n4. 

95.  7a  eta  nu  :  for  the  metre  see  §  94  viii.  96.  2b  sdnU  (plur.). 
3b  caesura  after  the  third  syllable;  3d  srutiai;  4a  etc.  tud;  5a  bdhubh; 
6d  upa;  9d  vapd ;  10b  prd  way  a;  lOd  dhehi ;  lib  spr^a,  tanul ; 
12c  bhusd  ;  13c  sdcia ;  15d,  16a  irregular  breaks;  20a  Viratsthana 
verse  (indra  type) ;  20b  sustutiti)   21a  emendation  seems  required. 

97.  3c  suaih;  10b  for  the  numerous  hypersyllabic  verses  of  which 
this  stands  first  see  §  224;  13a  caesura  after  the  third  syllable; 
14c  tudt.  98.  4b  heptasyllabic  verse;  7b  extended  Pentad  verse; 
8a  vdar,  §  151  i;  also  the  word  dive-dive  probably  belongs  to  this 
verse;  9b  perhaps  uruyuge,  §  166  iv;  12c  rdsvd.  99.  la  hidh,  cf. 
§140;  lb  vajri,  §  178;  4c  sd.  *100.  3a  bharatd ;  12b  the  interpre- 
tation is  doubtful,  perhaps  diauh,  then  irregular  break  and  Jagati 
cadence.  101.  3a  perhaps  mitra  varuna,  §  166  i;  7b  kdrtud ; 
7c  naasatyd;  9c  srlndndh ;  9c,  10a  catalectic  verses;  12c  asuriyah, 
cf.  §  173  ii:  hybrid  verse,  or  read  devdn,  cf.  §  151  iii;  13b  ro/u/jia  • 
13c  citra  iva. 

102.  4a  a-iirva-,  §  151  i;  7a  catalectic  verse;  10a  vwvesaam ; 
10b  hotfnaam;  lib  jydyisthah ;  14a  dvrtam ;  18a  tua.  103.  lc  upa 
su ;  2a  catalectic  verse;  3b  carkftia;  4b  dasat,  §  178;  5a  hypersyllabic 
verse,  §  224,  or  omit  vdjam,  §  152  i;  5c  extended  Pentad  verse, 
§  227  iii  a,  probably  requiring  correction;  6c  catalectic  verse;  10a 
prdyistham  ;  10b  four  syllables  are  wanting  at  the  end  of  this  verse, 
as  yasdstamam  ;  1 0c  rdthanaam ;  1 2a  irregular  cadence  ;  1 2b  catalectic 
verse. 

Mandala  IX. 

A.  IX  1-67.  [This  large  collection  of  Gayatrl  hymns  does  not 
correspond  to  any  collection  or  set  of  collections  addressed  to  other 
deities.  A  few  of  the  hymns  may  have  belonged  originally  to  such 
collections  as  those  of  Kanva  or  Kusika :  the  majority  must  be 
imitations  of  these,  and  from  the  regularity  of  their  structure  cannot 
be  earlier  than  the  normal  period.] 

1.  4a  arsd ;  9b  srindnti.  3.  9b  devebhiah.  4.  4a  pdvitdrah, 
§178;  Gbjiok;  7a  arsd.  5.  lc  prindn;  *8a,  9a,  lie  Epic  Anustubh 
semi-cadence.  6.  3b  svandh,  §  140.  8.  8b  prthividh;  9a  tud. 
9.  4b  nadio  'jinvat.  11.  6b  srinltana.  12.  3b  catalectic  verse. 
13.  6a  hydndh,  §  151  iii.  14.  4b  tdnua.  15.  la  perhaps  read  dhiy* 
aiti;  5c  sindhunaam.  18.  la  giristhdah,  §142  i;  lb  perhaps  aksanh, 
§151  i;  7b  heptasyllabic  verse:  perhaps  read  pdvamdnah.  19.  6b 
bhydsam,  §  151  iii. 

21.     2a  perhaps  abhlyujah,  §  167  iii;  5c  catalectic  verse;  6a  rdthia. 


316  Metrical  Commentary 

22.  7b  vdsu  (plur.).  24.  lc  srindndh;  7b  catalectic  verse,  unless  we 
read  mddhuah,  §  151  ii,  or  restore  mddhunah.  26.  3a  -a  'hian, 
§145  vi.  28.  2b  devebhiah;  6c  devavih  probably,  §  166  vii.  29.  la 
perhaps  prd  dh&amp;rd  asya,  cf.  30  la;  6a  d  indo.  30.  2a  the  reading  is 
doubtful,  but  recurs  ix  107  26b.  31.  2a  prthividh;  2c  vdjdnaam. 
32.  lb  maghdvanah  or  maghdvanah;  6b  mdhya.  34.  3a  vfsanam, 
§  170  ii  c.       36.     la  rdthia.       39.     la  arsd  ;  5b  dtha. 

40.  lc  perhaps  vipram  sumbhauti ;  3a  perhaps  nu  na  indo  rayim 
maham  ;  6c  vfsann,  §  177  iii.  41.  4c  dsvavat.  42.  2b  devebhiah] 
6b  dsvavat.  43.  6c  rdsva.  44.  6a  adyd.  46.  4c  srinlta.  47.  2a 
kdrtua;  2  c  irregular  cadence.  48.  3a  tud.  53.  1  a  catalectic  verse ; 
3c  rujd.  55.  4b  abhitid.  56.  3b  requires  correction,  perhaps  kanid 
na,  omitting  jdrdm:  but  see  §  135  a.  57.  4b  utd,  prthividh. 
58.  la  etc.  mandi  is  probable,  §  178.  59.  3c  sldd,  60.  2b  dtha  ; 
3a  probably  omit  asisyadat. 

61.  2a  long  fifth  syllable:  13a  upa  su;  19c  probably  devavih, 
§  166  vii;  23b  midhuiih.  62.  3c  asmdbhya;  4b  giristhdah,  §  142  i; 
8a  sd;  20c  devebhiah ;  24b  arsd.  63.  18b  dsvavat.  64.  lOb&amp;amnaara; 
lib  devavih;  26a  n£a ;  28a  ddvidyutatid,  §  139  i.  65.  2b,  3b 
devebhiah;  5c  iAa  sit ;  26c  srindndh;  28c,  29c,  30c  pdantam,  §  142  iii  a. 
66.  18d  extra  verse;  26c  hdricandrah;  28a  perhaps  aksaah,  §  151  i; 
30c  mfl_a.  67.  10a  ajdsua,  §  145  ii  6;  25c  mdam,  ^  151  i ;  27d  extra 
verse;  28a  irregular  cadence;  30  the  metre  is  of  the  type  11.9.9, 
but  is  perhaps  not  so  intended. 

B.  IX  68-97.  [Only  a  few  of  these  hymns  have  the  metrical 
variations  or  other  marks  characteristic  of  the  archaic  and  strophic 
periods.  Otherwise  the  collection  both  in  the  smoothness  of  its 
rhythm  and  in  the  equal  use  of  Tristubh  and  JagatI  metre  is  closely 
akin  to  the  second  Mandala  and  the  later  part  of  the  fifth.] 

68.  lc  perhaps  barhih-sddah,  §  1 78 ;  lOd  dhattd.  69.  2a  upa, 
§  171  iv ;  8b  dsvavat,  §  168  ii.  70.  la  catalectic  verse:  but  SV. 
duduhrire.  71.  2b  asuriyam  is  required  by  Vedic  usage,  see  §  135 
Addenda ;  4d  srindnti ;  6c  d  %m ;  lc  extended  Pentad  verse,  probably 
to  be  corrected.  72.  lc  caesura  after  third  syllable;  9c  mdsvd. 
74.  4c  prinanti  ;  8b  sasanvdn-  75.  2d  perhaps  tritiyam,  §  178  ; 
5a  dhanua,  §147;  5d  codaya.  76.  lc  dtiah,  §  151  ii;  3c  pinvd; 
5d  tuotdyah.  77.  3b  dhanuantu,  §  147.  78.  lc  tdnud ;  4b  suarjit. 
79.  la  dhanuantu;  lb  svandsah  :  brhddivesu,  §  179  ;  lc  the  rhythm  is 
irregular,  and  requires  correction  ;  3a,  3b  dratiah. 

80.  3d  dtia.  81.  3b  bhdva.  82.  5c  extended  Tristubh  verse. 
83.  2c  pavitdram,  §  179.  84.  5b  srinanti:  suarvidam.  85.  4d 
mldhuah;  5c  dtia;  10b  giristhdam,  g  142  i;  lie,  1 2d  extended  Tristubh 
verses. 

86.  2b  rdthia;  3a  hyandh,  §  151  iii:  catalectic  verse;  9b  diauh; 
15a  sd;  16a  prd ;  34d  dhdnia;  41d  asmdbhya;  42a  sd;  42c  dud; 
43a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  45a  dpia;  47d  svandh;  48b  dhdva ; 
48d  catalectic  verse. 

87.  la  drava;  5b  for  the  caesura  see  §  214  iii;  7a  svandh; 
7d  gdah,  §  142  ii ;  8b  urue,  §  145  ii  b  ;  9a  smd.  88.  la  Viratsthana 
verse  (indra  type):    tubhya ;    2a   bhurisdt,  §  178;    4a  perhaps  rnahd, 


ix  22-114  317 

§  159  iv,  but  cf.  the  rhythm  of  3a ;  4c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place.  89.  la 
prd  u;  3a  mddhuah,  §  151  ii;  7c  sagdfit  90.  la  rodaslyoh,  i  17.5  ii  ; 
Id  vdsu  (plur.);  4d  asmdbhya ;  6d  pdtd. 

91.  la  rdthia;  2b  svdnd;  4b  urnuhl;  5b  pra-dcah;  6a  Pentad 
verse;  6d  jiok.  92.  la  svdnd;  2b  ndnid  (plur.);  5a  nU.  93.  lc  the 
irregular  rhythm  suggests  emendation,  but  the  hymn  is  one  of  Gotama 
Nodhas ;  Id  dtia ;  3d  srinanti ;  5a  indsvd ;  5b  caesura  after  the  third 
syllable:  vaatrfpyam,  §  151  i;  5c  Viratsthana  verse.  94.  3c  mdrtidya, 
§  151  iii,  or  Pentad  verse ;  5a  'dsuam,  §  145  ii  b.  95.  5b  sid,  §  148  vi- 
96.  4b  svastdye  with  v  cons  is  doubtful  in  the  Rigveda  proper,  and 
perhaps  suasti  should  be  read  :  for  the  caesura  see  §  2  1 3  ii ;  8d  xrayd  ; 
9b  rdnia;  15d  urur  'va,  §  129  ii;  16b  arm ;  21c  camvdh  (§  135  6)  is 
improbable  :  either  camti  (sing.)  or  as  a  hybrid  verse  :  visa. 

97.  Id  sddmd  (plur.);  3c  svard;  dhanud;  3d  paid;  4b  hinotd ; 
11a  mddhud  (fern.);  lib  rbmd  (plur.) ;  16d,  17c  dhanud ;  17d  indu, 
§170  ii  f;  18a  syd ;  19d  sravd ;  20c  dhanuanti;  21b  sravd;  21c 
asmdbhya;  26a  perhaps  devaviyah,  cf.  §  173  ii ;  26d  see  §219:  for 
diviydjah  read  diviah;  27d  hrdhi;  32c  matsardvdn,  §  168  i;  33c,  36c 
visa ;  40d  «wm  ;  43c  perhaps  read  jocfo/o  'bhisri?idn ;  48b  sram ; 
49c,  51a  a6A£,  §  167  iii;  52c  vdata. 

C.  IX  98-114.  [Lyric  hymns  of  the  archaic  and  strophic  periods, 
with  which  the  editor  has  included  with  good  reason  the  Anustubh, 
Pentad,  and  Yiraj  hymns.] 

98.  lb  arm;  lb  vibhusdham,  §  166  iv;  2a  svdnd;  2d  hyand; 
2d,  3a  perhaps  aksaah,  §  151  i;  7b  irregular  cadence;  8a  heptasyllabic 
verse;  8b  pdantah,  §  142  iii  a;  9c  giristhdah,  §  142  i.  99.  4c  utd  ; 
7b  devebhiah.  100.  la  abhi,  §  167  iii.  101.  3a  abhi,  §  167  iii; 
10c  svdnd;  lid  vasiivid,  §  166  iv.  103.  6b  devebhiah.  104.  2c 
perhaps  devaviyam,  §  173  ii;  4a  vasuvidam;  5a  madanaam.  105.  2c 
devavih;  4b  dhanud  ;  5a  harlnaam.     106.     la  dcchd. 

107.  2d  srinantah;  3a  svdnd;  9a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place:  gdvamdn, 
§  142  ii :  aksaah  ;  9b  aksaah;  9c  catalectic  verse.  108.  4a  dadhidhn  ; 
6a  dpia;  10c  apdam ;  13b  d-nayitd,  §  142  iii  b.  109.  3b  arm; 
16a  svdnd;  17b  srinand ;  18b  irregular  cadence;  21a  devebhiah; 
22b  srindnn.  110.  6b  vasuruc,  §  166  iv;  9a  a«7«i  ?/ac?,  §  161  ii ; 
10a  requires  correction,  §  225;  12c  sasahvdn,  §  169  iii.  111.  la 
hdri?iid,  §  139  i :  catalectic  verse;   lc  suurah;  2a  iidt,  panindam. 

*112.  la  vd  U)  §  171  v;  le  the  refrain  is  borrowed  from  ix  106  4b. 
*113.  la  catalectic  verse;  2b  midhuah ;  3b  hypersyllabic  verse: 
probably  omit  tdm,  §  152  i;  5b  heptasyllabic  verse;  6b  perhaps  vdcam 
chandasidin,  as  a  long  fifth  syllable  is  very  unusual  in  the  full  cadence 
of  Epic  Anustubh  ;  7c  hypersyllabic  verse  :  the  Sandhi  combination  of 
two  verses  ($  119)  is  not  probable  :  the  omission  of  mtim  is  perhaps  on 
the  whole  the  best  course. 

Mandala  X. 

A.  X  1-9.  [The  Agni  hymns  1,  3,  6  shew  frequent  Pentad 
verses  and  other  variations  characteristic  of  the  strophic  period : 
cf.  x  46,  and  see  §  249  L] 


318  Metrical  Commentary 

1.  For  the  metre  see  §249  i;  Id,  6b,  6c  Pentad  verses;  2a  rodasiyoh, 
§  174  ii;  3b  tritiyam,  §  178;  5b  caesura  after  the  third  syllable,  but 
cf.  §  152  i;  5c  prdti-ardhirii  devd-devasya,  §  152  ii ;  6a  tn ;  7d  vahd: 
sahasia.  2.  3d  sd  ;  7a  tud ;  7c  pitvy&amp;nam  pravidvdn  is  probable  here. 
3.  la  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  lc  bhaasd,  §  142  v;  4c  sudsah. 
5.     lc  nhiioh,  §  151  ii. 

6.  For  the  metre  see  §  249  i;  lc,  6c,  6d  Viratsthana  verses;  la,  lb 
2b,  2c,  2d,  3c,  3d,  4a,  5a,  6a,  7a,  7  b  Pentad  verses ;  2a  catalectic 
Bhargavi  verse;  3a  Gautami  verse.  Thus  the  decasyllabic  verses  in 
this  hymn  are  more  than  half  the  whole  number,  and  in  doubtful 
cases  the  preference  maybe  given  to  this  interpretation;  lc  jyestha 
more  probably ;  2c  sakhyd  more  probably ;  2d  dtya  more  probably  ; 
6b  sdptivautah,  §  168  ii ;  7b  hdvya  more  probably,  but  see  §  136  ii. 
7.  la  suasti ;  2a  tubhya.  8.  2b  simivdn,  §  168  ii;  5c  irregular 
rhythm.       *9.     7c  jiok. 

B.  *X  10-19.  [The  hymns  14-18  are  clearly  of  the  latest  date : 
as  is  also  19,  which  is  unconnected  by  subject.  On  the  other  hand  the 
position  of  hymns  10-13  is  open  to  question,  both  on  metrical  and  on 
linguistic  grounds.] 

10.  Metre  and  language  are  closely  allied  to  those  of  x  95 ; 
lb  purti  as  ace.  sing,  is  very  doubtful,  see  §  160  i ;  4c  dpia;  5d  prthivi, 
§  173  i;  7d  rathia;  8d  vrha;  10c  barbrhi ;  12a  requires  emendation  : 
perhaps  nd  te  tanvam  n  tanud,  cf.  §  1356;  13a  and  13b  also  require 
emendation  :  perhaps  read  batb  bata  n  asi  yama  nd  evd  |  tdva  mdnah  \\ ; 
14c  for  tdva  read  te.  11-13.  See  p.  45.  11.  2a  dpia ;  3a  sd ; 
5d  sasanvdn ;  6a  Iraya ;  6c  su-apas- ;  8d  perhaps  interchange  dtra  and 
vltdt ;  9c  vahd.  12.  Id  pratidh ;  2a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place ; 
2d  irregular  break ;  4a  as  2d.  13.  3c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place ; 
4a  devebhiah. 

14.  2c  ydtra;  3d  svdha  'nie,  §  145  vi,  or  svdhd  anye ;  5c  catalectic 
Bhargavi  verse,  ^  227  iii  b ;  8d  Rest  at  the  fifth  place ;  9a  ita  twice ; 
10a  drava ;  10a,  11a  sudnau,  §145vi;  lie  tdbhiam;  lid  svasti ; 
15c  iddm  should  perhaps  be  omitted.  15.  3c,  4a  barhih-sddah,  §  178 ; 
7b  dhatta;  7c  putrebhiah;  7d  yacchata;  9a  perhaps  devdtd;  1  lb  sadatd; 
13b  vidmd ;  14c  svardjdh,  §  151  iii.  16.  3b,  3c  gacchd  ;  3b  didm  or 
dydam;  5a  srja ;  14d  long  fifth  syllable  exceptionally:  perhaps 
agnim  sit  17.  5b  sd;  9c  sahasra-arghdm ;  13a  appears  to  be  a 
dimeter  verse   perverted   by  the   recollection   of   12a:    omit  skanndh. 

18.  lb    sudh ;     2d    bhavatd ;    8a   irsva ;    11    cf.  i    164   42;    13a    tudt. 

19.  6b  semi-cadence  of  Epic  Anustubh  :  this  is  therefore  the  third 
verse  of  an  Anustubh  stanza,  the  first  two  being  similar  to  those  of 
stanza  8. 

C.  X  20-26.     [The  Vimada  hymns  are  of  a  very  early  type,  see 

§  201.] 

20.  1  an  imperfect  quotation  from  x  25  1 ;  2a  emendation  is 
required:  perhaps  omit  agnim  (§  152  i)  and  read  bhujdam  :  but  see 
§130  iv ;  2d  extra  verse;  3c  srdyinidantah ;  cf.  sucidan,  §  151  iii; 
5c  sddma  (plur.) ;  6c  vdsimantam,  §  168  ii;  8b  perhaps  siuh.      21  etc. 


X  1-45  319 

For  the  metre  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  66;  4b  sdhasdvann,  §  177  iii;  7c  bhfl 
rhythm  is  influenced  by  that  of  trimeter  verse. 

22.  For  the  metre  see  §  243 ;  la  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type) ; 
lc  fslnaam;  4a  vdatasya ;  5b  vdhadhiai  (§  146  ii)  is  very  doubtful  ; 
7a  requires  correction,  as  d  no  valid  indra  pfksa  adyd ;  9a  double  Rest, 
§  226  iv  a  :  perhaps  dvd  tvdm  nah  \\ ;  11a  extended  Viratsthana  verse; 
12a,  13a  as  la;   13c  ydsaam;    13d  dhenundam. 

23.  la   extended  Viratsthana  verse;    lb  hdrlnaam;    lc  smd 

§  151  iii :  bhuut ;  2d  perhaps  kpiavd/ui,  §  151  i :  ddasasya  (ib.)  is  quite 
uncertain ;  3c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  4a  sd,  sud;  4c  as  la;  4d  vdatah, 
§  142  v ;  5a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  with  irregular  break  ;  emendation 
is  probably  required ;  6d  as  la :  gopdah,  §  142  i;  7b  as  3c  rather  than 
ca  indra  :  carseh. 

24.  2a  catalectic  verse,  unless  we  read  ucdthaih,  §  151  iii;  3c  for 
the  cadence  cf.  21  7c;  *5b  samicyoh,  §  139  iv.  25.  lc  ddha;  5c  the 
rhythm  here,  as  also  in  6e,  8c,  9c,  9e  is  that  of  trimeter  verse,  cf.  21  7c, 
24  3c;  7c  sedhd,  rdjann,  §  177  iii;  7e  isala,  §  175  i.  26.  For  the 
metre  see  §  191  ;  2a  tidt;  4c  matlndam  is  uncertain  in  this  hymn; 
7c  semi-cadence  of  Epic  Anustubh  :  perhaps  read  prd  dildhod.... 

D.  X  27-84.  [The  small  groups  of  hymns  here  included  are 
generally  of  a  type  which  stands  in  contrast  with  that  of  the  archaic 
and  strophic  periods,  without  having  the  specific  character  of  the  Kutsa 
hymns.  It  is  very  probable  that  many  of  the  hymns  assigned  to  the 
cretic  period  really  belong  to  the  popular  Rigveda,  but  maintain 
artificially  the  linguistic  features  of  the  Rigveda  proper.] 

*27,  *28.  See  p.  45.  *27.  6c  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  lid  read  i  for 
im  the  second  time,  §  178;  18a  vxsu-ancah.  *28.  lc  hybrid  verse; 
12a  the  text  gives  the  hiatus  correctly. 

29.  2d  sasanvdn ;  4a  tudvatah;  5a  %rayd ;  8d  sumati,  §  139  iii. 
30.  9c  a-usdndm  as  a-arksd,  viii  68  16b;  lie  siadhvam,  §  148  vi ; 
12c  sthd:  su-apat- ;  13a  read  dyatir  ddrsram  ;  14c  dhattand.  31.  3c 
dnasmd,  §  158  i;  4d  sd ;  6b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  9a  ksdam, 
§  142  i,  or  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  lOd  samidm.  32.  4c  Bhargavi 
verse  ;  5b  two  syllables  are  wanting  after  the  caesura  :  perhaps  supply 
solid ;  5d  caesura  after  the  third  syllable:  4mebhiah\  *6-9  see  p.  45; 
*7b  prd  eti  ;  *9c  sd.       33.     lb  smd.       *34.     8c  nd,  §  175  ii ;  lid  sd. 

35.  2d  svdndh)  7b  suvd ;  10b  catalectic  verse;  14a  avathd. 
36.  2a  dia/tih)  8b  devaviyam,  cf.  §  174  ii;  11a  adyd',  14a  read  pascdt ; 
1 4b  read  uttardt.  37.  2d  visvdhd  twice,  §  170  ii  &lt;:/ ;  6a  catalectic 
verse;  7a  visvdhd;  7d  jidk ;  8b  bhadsvantam,  §  142  v;  10a  bhavd ; 
12a  cakpnd,  §  158  i. 

39.  4c  adbhidh;  5b  dthd ;  6b  mdhya ;  10a  -ds'ua?n,  §  145  ii  b ; 
10c  carkftiam  ;  14b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place.  40.  la  ydantnm, 
§  142  iii  a;  2a  vdstav,  §  170  ii  e  ;  5d  dsvavate,  §  168  ii ;  6d  bharatd; 
11a  vidmd,  %  158  i;  lib  perhaps  yuvateh,  §  170  iii;   12d  duria. 

42.  lc  taratd;  Id  rdmayd ;  2b  bodhaya ;  3d  vasilvidam,  §  166  iv; 
5d  su-dstrdn.  43.  2a  tuadrik;  7b  kulidh,  §  151  ii.  44.  4c  k/-*ra  \ 
grbhdyd:  tue,  §  173  v;  7b  catalectic  verse:  perhaps  yuyujrire,  cf. 
ix  70  la ;    8b  diauh. 

45.    2a    trayidhd;    2b   dhdmd   (plur.) ;    4c    for    htm    restore   hi; 


320  Metrical  Commentary 

8b  Pentad  verse;  8d  diauh;  9a  adyti;  10a,  10b  bhajd ;  lib  vdsu 
(plur.);  12a  nardam ;  12d  dhattd.  46.  For  the  metre  see  §  249  i:  it 
suggests  for  this  hymn  an  earlier  date  than  its  neighbours  can  lay 
claim  to.  The  Pentad  verses  are  la,  lb,  lc,  2a,  2b,  5a,  5b,  5c,  6a,  6c, 
7a,  whilst  5d,  6b,  6d,  7c,  7d  are  Viratsthana  verses.  Hence  the 
Pentad  hymn  seems  to  have  consisted  of  5  double  stanzas,  thus 
corresponding  in  length  to  the  hymns  in  i  65-70:  whilst  3,  4,  8-10 
may  be  Tristubh  stanzas  appended  later.  6d  Sandhi  at  the  caesura ; 
7c  the  interpretation  is  doubtful :  JagatI  cadence.  47.  2c  carkftiam; 
3c  srutdrsim ;  5a  dsvavantam,  §  168  ii;  8a  tud. 

48-50.  These  hymns  are  almost  alone  in  the  Rigveda  in  combining 
frequent  Rests  with  Jagati  cadence :  but  cf.  x  77,  78.  48.  lc  mdam 
(§  151  i)  is  doubtful:  perhaps  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  6a  dud-dud; 
7b  abhi,  §  167  iii ;  9a  bhuut,  §  142  iii  b.  49.  la  daam,  §  142  iii  a, 
or  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  lb  mdhya ;  Id  extended  Viratsthana 
verse;  2a  mdam,  §  151  i :  double  Rest,  §  226  iv  6;  2b  apdam;  3b,  5c 
as  Id;  6b  vrtrdm  'va,  §  129  iii:  probably  as  Id  rather  than  ddasam, 
§  151  i;  6d  rocandvi,  §  130  iv;  9b  prthividm;  10b  tvdsta  d- ; 
11a  Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type) :  vivie,  cf.  §  140  iii;  lie  visvd  it, 
or   Rest  at  the  fifth  place. 

50.  1  b  perhaps  visva-dbhuve  (Grassmann) ;  2a  sd  ;  2b  carkftiah  : 
extended  Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type) ;  2c  hybrid  verse ;  3a 
Viratsthana  verse  {indra  type);  3c  for  the  caesura  see  §  214  iii: 
asuriydya ;  4a  as  2b ;  4c  Rest  at  the  fourth  place :  then  perhaps 
cyautandh,  §  149  iv ;  4d  jydyistha  :  extended  Viratsthana  verse,  but 
see  §  149  iii ;  5a  probably  extended  Viratsthana  verse,  but  see 
§  148  i;  5b  extended  GautamT  verse,  rather  than  as  in  §  149  iii; 
5c  the  cadence  requires  correction,  perhaps  vardhitti  ca  nah;  6c  probably 
pdtaram,  §  149  iii ;  6d  as  4d  ;  7b  vdsunaam. 

*51-53.  See  p.  45.  *51.  2b  tanvah,  §  135  6;  2c  ku  'aha;  4c  as 
2b;  5a  ehl;  5d  vdlm;  6d  jidydh,  §  140  iii;  8c  pfirusam,  §  178;  9a 
hybrid  verse:  but  see  $  130  ii.  *52.  la  sdstdnd;  lc  brutd;  4a  mdam; 
5c  bdhuoh,  *53  4c  the  opening  requires  emendation ;  5b  gdvajdtdh, 
§  142  ii;  5c  perhaps  drhhah,  cf.  vi  3  Id ;  6c  vayatd;  6d  bhavd ; 
8b  tisthatd;    11c  visvdhd. 

54.  3a  u,  55.  2c  irregular  double  Rest,  §  227  iii  c ;  5d  hidh, 
§140  iii  (Addenda);  8d  requires  correction.  56.  2b  asmdbhya; 
2d  sudm ;    *4d  extended  Pentad  verse ;    *5b  catalectic  verse. 

*57.  3c  pitrndam ;  4c  jidk.  *59.  3a  abhi  su ;  3b  diauh ;  4b  nu ; 
5c  extended  Viratsthana  verse;  6c  ji6k ;  10a  Irayd:  gdam,  §  142  ii; 
10c  -rdnidh.      *60.     6d  rdjann,  §  177  iii;  8e  perhaps  arista-,  §  167  iv. 

61.  [This  extraordinary  hymn  has  a  metrical  unity  which  stands 
in  striking  contrast  to  its  discontinuity  of  subject :  it  has  all  the  marks 
of  the  archaic  period,  and  yet  a  parallel  hymn  can  hardly  be  found 
amongst  the  archaic  collections.  Alone  in  this  part  of  the  Rigveda  it 
is  dissociated  in  structure  from  its  companion  hymn.  An  Iranian 
origin  has  been  suggested  by  the  proper  name  Ndbhdnedistha  in  18b.] 
la  raudaram,  §  149  iii,  but  more  probably  Viratsthana  verse;  lb  sdcidm; 
lc  hybrid  vert&gt;e ;  2a  ddbhia;  2c  Viratsthana  verse,  with  irregular 
cadence ;  3b  sdcid ;  3d  dsrinlta :  Viratsthana  verse ;  4d  ndyisam, 
§  142  iii  b ;    7c  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  i  c ;    8b  pdrd  ait ;    9c  sdnitd 


x  45-83  321 

with  hiatus  the  first  time,  or  Rest  at  the  fifth  place;  lie  Viratsthana 
verse,  but  see  §  149  iv;  13a  tan  nti  asya  is  perhaps  most  probable; 
14d  perhaps  read  srudhi  hotar  n  rtdsya  hotar  adhruk ;  15a  as  la- 
16a  Viratsthana  verse;  16c  sd;  17a  as  2c;  17 djydyistha;  20c  urdhud, 
srdyinih;  21a  ddha ;  22a  ddhd  tudm:  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type) 
23a  a  series  of  defective  verses  are  found  towards  the  end  of  the  hymn, 
the  others  being  24c,  26a,  27a,  27d :  these  require  emendation ;  25a 
yddl :  Rest  at  the  fifth  place  ;  26b  su-uktaih ;  27b  bhutti ;  27c  Rest  at 
the  fourth  place.       62.     8c  satdsuam,  %  145  ii  6;  9b  divo  'va,  §  129  ii. 

63.  2c  sthti:  adbhidh;  7a  ayaje,  §  178;  10c  su-aritrdm;  lie  devdhutl, 
§  139  iv;  13a  mdrtiah,  §  151  iii;  14a  avathd ;  15a  suasti:  Rest  at  the 
fifth  place;  16a  srdyisthd ;  16c  sd.  64.  7a  catalectic  verse;  10c 
rdthasas  pdtih,  §  151  iii;    12b  ddaddtd  ;    12c  pipayata. 

65.  2a  indra-agni ;  5a  siksd;  9b  indrd-vdyd;  14b  rtajiidah, 
§  142  i;  15b  caesura  after  the  third  syllable,  or  read  visvani  ye; 
15d  pdtd.  66.  la  brhdc-chravdn,  §  151  iii;  4b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place  ; 
12d  brdhmd  (plur.) ;  14c  etid. 

67.  4a  dudbhyam.  68.  2a  caesura  after  the  third  syllable; 
3a  sadhu-arydh ;  9a,  9b  sd;  10b  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  ic; 
12b  perhaps  pilruih,  §  145  ii  d :  or  Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  12c  sd. 

69.  5c,  6c  stiro  'va,  §  129  ii;  5d  nu;  12c,  12d  catalectic  verses; 
12d  tistha.  70.  Id  bhavd;  2d  devebhiah;  8b  sidatd:  siondm; 
11a  vahd. 

*71.  4c  utd  tuasmai ;  7d  probably  sndtud,  omitting  u.  *72.  8d 
dsiat,  §  145  iii. 

73.  2b puru  adv.  §  160  i;  3a  Pentad  verse;  4b  ndsatid;  6d  hfdid; 
7c  siond;  9b  utd  :  for  the  ninth  syllable  see  §  177  i;  9c  prthivi&amp;m. 
74.  la  vdsunaam;  lb  Gautami  verse;  2d  suaih;  3a  Rest  at  the  fifth 
place,  rather  than  esaam  :  amftdnaam ;  3c  Gautami  verse,  §  226  iii  b  : 
in  the  cadence  probably  sddhdyantah  (§151  iii),  cf.  ii  3  8a;  3d  vasaviam 
exceptionally  §  151  ii ;  4b  the  rhythm  is  easily  made  normal  by  reading 
gomantam  urvdm  abhi  ye  titrtsdn ;  4c  irregular  cadence ;  6b  probably 
ndma,  giving  a  Viratsthana  (indra)  verse. 

75.  la  su;  lc  trayidhd;  3a  bhdmidh  u-  with  Sandhi,  §  130  ii ; 
6b  susdrtud,  §  139  v:  tid;  6d  mehatnud;  8d  perhaps  madhuvfdham, 
%  166  iv  and  via.  76.  la  ilrjdam;  2a  srdyisthant ;  3b  catalectic 
verse;  3c  tvdstare,  §  149  iii;  4a  hatd ;  4d  perhaps  devaviyam,  cf. 
§  173  ii ;    5d  area;    8b  sunuthd. 

77,  78.  For  the  metre  see  §§  52,  227  ii,  and  250  ii.  77.  6-8 
Tristubh  stanzas;  7a  Viratsthana  verse ;  7b  marudbhiah,  78.  la,  6c 
extended  Viratsthana  verses;  lc  see  §  227  iii  d;  Id  ksitlndam; 
2a,  2b  JagatI  verses  :  so  too  3a,  6a,  6b ;  3b  agnindam ;  3c  slmivatitah 
with  irregular  cadence,  §  168  ii;  3d  pitfndam;  4a  rdthdnaam  :  ye  Wdh 
with  Sandhi;  5,  7  JagatI  stanzas;  5a  jydyisthdsah;  8  Tristubh  stanza  ; 
8a  probably  omit  devdh  (§  152  i)  and  read  with  Rest  at  the  fifth  place. 

79.  3a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place ;  5b  djyaih,  §  137  iv ;  a  syllable  is 
wanting  at  the  end  of  the  verse;  5d  pratidnn.  80.  lb  srutia; 
2c  Viratsthana  verse;  4a  daat,  §  142  iii  a;  4c  havydm,  §  136:  hence 
Viratsthana  verse  ;  7c  prd  'va. 

*81.  2a  add  at  the  end  kathdslt.  *82.  2d  saptarsin ;  4b  hybrid 
verse.       *83.     la  tividhat,  §  169  vi;    3b  requires  correction:  perhaps 

a.  21 


322  Metrical  Commentary 

sapdtndn  for  sdtrun  :  jahi ;  5c  irregular  cadence,  requiring  correction  ; 
5d  sua ;  7b  ddha.  *84.  2a  agnir  'va,  §  129  ii;  4c  Rest  at  the  fifth 
place:  tudyd;  6a  dbhutid,  §  145  iv. 

E.  *X  85—114.  [In  the  single  hymns  which  conclude  the  tenth 
Mandala  those  which  belong  to  the  popular  Rigveda  predominate  :  but 
they  only  occur  in  groups  on  account  of  incidental  agreement  in  the 
metre  and  number  of  stanzas.  The  first  three  hymns  are  of  very 
unusual  length.] 

*85.  7c  diauh;  lie  perhaps  srotaram,  §  149  iii ;  12b  vidndh; 
20c  siondm;  22b  tud ;  30c,  31a  vadhvdh,  §  1356;  34a  perhaps  omit 
kdtukam  etdd ;  38c  pdtibhlah  is  doubtful,  §  144;  40b  -e  u-  with 
Sandhi,  §  130  i;  44c  Rest  at  the  fourth  place:  siond;  45a  midhuah ; 
46b  svasrudm,  §  146  iii;  46c  hypersyllabic  opening,  requiring  correction, 
cf.  §  191  iii. 

*86.  [Although  the  fifth  verse  in  each  stanza  is  a  refrain,  there  are 
only  slight  indications  of  the  Epic  Anustubh  rhythm,  as  in  the  semi- 
cadence  in  10a,  14a,  15a,  20a,  23c]  2c  nd  u:  nd  'not'  with  hiatus; 
4c  sua,  §  145  vi ;  10a  snid ;  12c  dpia. 

*87.  [Although  of  late  date,  the  Tristubh  verses  of  this  hymn  are 
free  from  contamination,  and  the  Anustubh  verses  have  the  earlier 
rhythm;  see  §  198  ii.]  2a  sprsd;  2d  dhatsud;  7c  jahl;  8a  sd; 
lOd  tredhd  exceptionally,  §  140  iii;  12b,  13c  hypersyllabic  verses, 
§§224,  217;  14a  hybrid  verse;  15c  sdrava  Wchantu  with  Sandhi, 
§  130  i;  16a  probably  paurusyena ;  16b  dsvyena;  19c  dahd ;  22b 
sahasya,  §  135  a  ;  23b  smd. 

*88.  la  pdantam,  §  142  iii  a;  6c,  9b  require  correction  :  see  §  217; 
10c  trayidhd;  12d  dpa;  15a,  16a  due;  17b  perhaps  yajiianiyoh, 
§  173  ii. 

89.  2b  rdthia  ;  2d  tvisid  ;  5b  simivdn  :  6d  vlhi  (plur.) ;  8b  pdrvd 
(plur.) ;  8d  Pentad  verse ;  9d  vfsatiam,  §  170  ii  c  ;  lOd  read  hdvio  yoge; 
13d  probably  dnu  dpah;  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  i  c;  17b  Rest  at  the 
fourth  place. 

*90.  [Very  late  rhythm,  §  198  iii.]  2a  ptirusah,  §  178;  4a  hyper- 
syllabic verse,  or  combination  of  urdhvdh  and  ut,  §  130  i;  6a  purusena; 
8c  vdyavyan,  §  135  a;  11a  as  6a  ;   lid  pdda,  §  174  i  a;  ucyate,  §  170  i. 

91.  7b  trsti,  §  160  i;  Sd  nd  'nidm,  §  145  vi;  tudt ;  13d  catalectic 
verse.  92.  4d  dthd;  9a  rudardya,  §  149  ii;  9c  sn-dvdn;  14b  Rest  at 
the  fourth  place. 

93.  For  the  metre  see  §  242  v ;  5a  apdam ;  7b  rdthasas  pdtih, 
§  151  iii;  9a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  9c  sahd;  10a  dhaatam, 
§  142  iii  a;  lOd  rdydh  utd  with  Sandhi,  §  130  i;  12a  Pentad  verse; 
14b  hybrid  verse ;  15b  tdnuah.  *94.  la  catalectic  verse;  5d  puru, 
see  §  160:  perhaps  the  adverb;  9a  hdri,  §  174  i  b ;  10b  Rest  at  the 
fifth  place;  11a  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  12a  evd;  14a  extended 
Tristubh  verse. 

*95.  [Companion  hymn  to  x  10,  with  several  archaic  variations.] 
3a  A.  Ludwig  completes  the  verse  by  reading  asakta ;  4a  perhaps  sd  a 
vdsu;  4c  two  syllables  are  wanting:  perhaps  ydsmi,  §  178;  5a,  5b  smd; 
5b  dviatyai  ;  6a  srdyinih ;  7a  caesura  after  the  third  syllable  ;  8c  sma ; 
9b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place,  rather  than  ksavanibhih,  §  151  i;  9c  tanvdh, 


x  83-115  323 

§  135  6,  or  hybrid  verse;  10b  dpia  ;  lOcjdnista;  lOd  tiratd;  11a  gava- 
pithidya,  §  142  ii :  extended  Tristubh  verse;  12d  ddhd  ydd;  13c  Rest 
at  the  fourth  place,  or  tdva  for  te.  96.  3a,  7d  sd ;  10a  smd ;  lib 
extended  Tristubh  verse;  13b  dthd. 

*97.  [Very  late  hymn.]  7a  asvavatim,  §  168  ii ;  10a  pariffMdafa 
§  142  i;  10b  stentih  with  z'm  (Grassinann),  $  129  ii ;  13a  heptasyllabic 
verse;  14c,  15c,  19c  catalectic  verses;  20a  as  13a.  *98.  2b  tndt ; 
10c  tanvdh,  §  135  b. 

99.  See  §  105  ii ;  lb  Viratsthana  verse,  rather  than  vdsardm, 
§149  iii;  4c  irregular  cadence;  5d  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  ic; 
6b  Rest  at  the  fourth  place,  with  irregular  break  ;  7d  Viratsthana 
verse;  8a  sd;  8b  Pentad  or  Gautami  verse ;  8c  Pentad  verse;  8d  as  7d; 
lie  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  12c  svastim  exceptionally,  §  125  iii  b ; 
or  read  karad  asmai  suastim. 

100.  la  drhyd;  2a  su,  bharatd ;  6a  ntt ;  7a  cakrmd,  §  158  i;  9b 
catalectic  verse,  or  read  yuyotand ;  10b  angdhue;  10c  evd ;  lib  §  120; 
12c  rdjid. 

*101,  *102.  See  p.  46.  *101.  3b  Rest  at  the  fifth  place,  rather  than 
short  eighth  syllable;  7a  Pentad  verse;  8b  vdrmd  (plur.);  10b  vdsibhih, 
§170  iii:  caesura  after  the  third  syllable;  12d  coddyatd,  khuddtd. 
*102.  2a  smd;  3a  yacchd;  4b  smd;  7d  pddid,  §  151  ii;  lib  pipidnd. 
*103.  lc,  2a  for  the  caesura  see  §  205  i  c ;  2c  jayatd ;  7a  hybrid 
verse;  8a  nayitd,  §  142  iii  b  :  probably  brdhmanaspdtih,  §  151  iii; 
10a  liar  say  d;  11a  hybrid  verse;  12b  apue,  §  151  ii ;  12c  dahd. 
104.     3d  s'dcid. 

105.  For  the  metre  see  §  244  iii ;  la  Viratsthana  verse,  rather  than 
stotardm,%  149  iii:  the  verse  ends  haryata  d,  cf.  10c ;  lc  represents  a 
trimeter  verse:  Rest  at  the  fifth  place,  then  vaatdpidya,  cf.  §  151  i; 
stanzas  3  to  6  see  §  244  iii ;  8a  two  syllables  are  wanting  :  perhaps 
supply  indra  before  the  caesura ;  10c  sue :  Viratsthana  verse  rather  than 
pdtare,  §  149  iii;  11a  asuriya.  106.  Numerous  duals  combined  with 
iva,  §  129  i b;  7a,  7d  for  the  caesura  see  §  213  ii;  7c  nd  'as'  combined, 
§  122  ;  lOd  suyavasdd. 

*107.  6b  perhaps  yajnaniyam,  §  173  ii ;  10a  'dsuam  probably,  cf. 
§  145  ii  b.  *108.  see  p.  46;  4a  vedd  (1  sing.),  §  158  i:  ddbhia ; 
5a  d-icchah,  §  121  c;  5b  divo  'ntdn;  6d  mflat;  10a  nd;  lOd,  11a  itd ; 
11a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place,  rather  than  duurdm,  but  see  §  151  i. 

110.  lc  vahd;  4d  devebhiah,  siondm ;  5d  devebhiah,  bhavatd ; 
8d  su-dpasah;  10a  tmdnid;  lie  by  Sandhi  pradisi  'rtdsya,  not  as  in 
the  text.  ill.  lb  nfndm;  3a  srutiai,  §  146  ii;  10c  Viratsthana 
verse.  112.  lc  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  2a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place; 
5b  rdiiia;  6b  requires  correction,  as  end  somam  piba  satakrato  tvdm; 
7c  as  2a ;  9a  sldd  ;  9c  ndrte  tudt.  113.  4d  suapas-  ;  7c  Rest  at  the 
fifth  place;  9a  bhdrl  (adv.)  ;  10a  extended  Tristubh  verse ;  lOd  vidd 
s4.  *114.  4a  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224  :  see  also  §  130  iv;  6c  vimdyd; 
10b  Pentad  verse. 

F.  *X  115-191.  [These  shorter  hymns  include  many  charms,  all 
belonging  to  the  popular  Rigveda.] 

115.  lc  yddl;  2d  caesura  after  the  third  syllable ;  5a  irregular 
cadence ;    5c,  5d  catalectic  verses ;    5d  tesaam ;    7a  evd  with  hiatus : 

21—2 


324  Metrical  Commentary 

mdrtiaih,  §  151  iii;  8a  sahasdvann,  §  177  iii;  9c  Rest  at  the  fifth 
place.  116.  lc,  Id  pibd ;  7a,  7c  (the  second  time)  tubhya.  *117.  lc, 
2d  utd;  5c  rdthia. 

118.  6a  mdrtidh,  §  151  iii ;  8b  osd.  *119.  See  p.  46 ;  11a  hepta- 
syllabic  verse;  13a  probably  grhdm.  *120.  la  jydyistham ;  lb 
Viratsthana  verse ;  Id  Pentad  verse ;  3b  duih ;  4a  as  Id;  8a  brdhmd 
(plur.):  brhddiva,  %  178;  9c  for  the  caesura  see  §  213  ii ;  9d  extended 
Tristubh  verse.       *121.     7c  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224,  but  cf.  §  152  i. 

122.  3b  hybrid  and  catalectic  verse  ;  5a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place ; 
5b  matsud ;  5d  perhaps  rurucuh,  §  169  ii;  7d  djiam,  or  as  5a; 
8a  ahuanta,  §  142  iii  6;  8d  pdtd.  123.  7d  ndmd  (plur.).  124.  See 
p.  46;  *ld  jyok  exceptionally,  §  140  iii;  *2d  probably  su&amp;t  sakhydt; 
*3b  dhdmd  (plur.);  6c  Pentad  verse;  8c  perhaps  rdjanam,  §  170  ii  c. 
*125.     4a  sd-,   4b  i,  §  178;   8a  evd. 

126.  For  the  metre  see  Ch.  ix,  App.  No.  54  ;  2c  Epic  Anustubh 
semi-cadence;  2d  pdthd;  5c  rudardm,  §  149  ii ;  catalectic  trimeter 
verse;  8c  evd  sU.  *127.  3b  usdmm,  §  170  ii  a;  4a  adyd ;  6b  ydvdyd. 
*128.  8a  hybrid  verse;  9c  omit  dditydh,  §  152  i.  *129.  2b  rdtridh; 
6b  hybrid  verse :  or  iydm  monosyllabic,  §  151  iii ;  7b  add  dadhe. 
*130.  [Very  late  hymn.]  la  Rest  at  the  fourth  place;  2c  il  sddah 
requires  correction,  cf.  §  171  v;  5d,  6a  manusyah,  §  135  a;  7a  see 
§  177  i. 

131.  6a,  7c  sxv-dvan.  132.  For  the  metre  see  §  242  vi ;  la  see 
§  242  vi ;  lb  Rest  at  the  fourth  place  ;  lc  devd,  §  174  i  a ;  2b  for  the 
caesura  see  §  213  ii ;  3b  rekaimh  possibly,  §  149  iv ;  3c  Gautami  verse  : 
rdyiknah,  §  151  i;  3d  u;  6b  diauh;  7a  perhaps  apna-rdjand.  133, 
134.  See  §  109  iv.  133.  la  /wa  sii ;  lg,  etc.  jidkdh  ;  6a  tudydvah; 
7a  sd :  tdm  should  perhaps  begin  the  verse ;  7c  dcchidra-udhni. 
134.      2a  smd. 

*135.  4b  vij?rebhiah ;  7c  iydm  perhaps  monosyllabic,  §  151  iii. 
*136.     6c  catalectic  verse.       *137.     5a  catalectic  verse ;  Ictud. 

138.  4a  dsiat,  §  145  iii;  5b  tujia;  6a  tid:  srutia;  6b  catalectic 
verse.  *139.  4c  hypersyllabic  verse,  §  224.  140.  See  §  246  v ; 
2a  §  152  ii;  3c  tue\  §  173  v;  6c  tud.  *141.  lc  yacchd ;  4a  indrdvdyd. 
*142.  la  tve,  §  173  v;  lb  dsti  is  probably  to  be  omitted,  or  read  nahi 
anydd  dpyam  ah ;  5a  srdyinayah ;  6c  namd. 

143.  3a  ddmsistha,  §  174  i  a.  144.  See  §  246  v;  2b  dadsvate, 
§  142  v;  4c  perhaps  vivartanih,  see  §  225;  5a  siendh,  §  145  vi;  5b  d 
abharat ;  5c,  6c  dyu,  §  178.  *145.  6c  mdam,  §  151  i;  6e  extra  verse. 
*146.     2c  -bhir  'va,  §  129  ii.       147.     4c  tudvrdhah ;  5b  krdhl. 

148.  la  Viratsthana  verse  (indra  type);  lb  sasanvdmsah;  lc  bhard; 
2b  Viratsthana  verse,  rather  than  ddasih:  but  see  §  151  i;  3d  ratha- 
ulha ;  4a  brdhmd  (plur.):  tubhya;  4b  ddah,  §  142  iii  a :  nfndam; 
4c  bhavd.  *149.  lc  dsvam  'va,  §  129  iii;  2c  bhuuh  perhaps:  cf. 
§  142  v ;  4a  gdvo  'va,  §  129  ii ;  4c  pdtir  'va,  ib. ;  5b  juhue,  §  142  iii  b. 

150.  See  §  246  v ;  3c  vahd  ;  4a  omit  devdh,  §  152  i ;  4b  manusyah, 
§  135  a.  *151.  2a  heptasyllabic  verse;  4c  hrdayydyd,  §  135  a. 
*152.  4b  yacchd;  5c  catalectic  verse.  *155.  lb  gacchd;  saddnue, 
cf.  §  145  ii  b  ;  2c  arayyam,  §  135  b.  156.  2c  hinvd.  *157.  Id  needs 
restoration  as  a  trimeter  verse.  *158.  lb  vdatah,  §  142  v:  -ksaat 
perhaps,  §  151  i ;  2  may  perhaps  be  restored  as  follows  :  sdvitar  ydsya 


x  115-191  325 

te  hdrah  ,  savtinam  satdm  arhati  \  tena  no  pdhi  didyutah;  5a  tud, 
*159.  4c  catalectic  verse.  160.  4a  em;  5b  tud;  5d  perhaps  tud, 
§  151  ii. 

*161.  2b  nitah,  §  124;  4&amp;  jvud;  4b  m;  5a  tud  the  second  time. 
*162.  lc  hep tasyllabic  verse,  but  cf.  2a;  2a  catalectic  verse.  *163.  lc 
sirsanydm,  §  135a;  2c  dosanydm  ib. ;  4b  -dbhidm.  *164.  3a  the 
metre  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  period  :  perhaps  read  ydd  dsastyd 
nihsdstid  'bhisastid;  3b  updrimd,  §  158  i;  5c  hypersyllabic  verse; 
5e  extra  verse.  *165.  3c  requires  correction :  perhaps  sdm  na  astu 
gobhiah  purusebhiah.  *166.  2b  indro  'va,  §  129  ii;  stanza  5  requires 
correction.  *167.  4c  vaam,  §  151  i;  4d  irregular  cadence.  *168.  la 
nu.  *169.  Id  ava-sdyd.  *170.  See  p.  46 ;  3b  Rest  at  the  fourth 
place. 

172.  2b  for  the  caesura  see  §  213  ii.  *173.  2b  pdrvato  'va, 
§  129  ii;  2c  indro  'va,  ib.;  4a  probably  diauh:  then  prthvi,  cf.  $  151  iii. 
*174.  2a  ahhlvftyd  is  probable,  cf.  §  167  i :  catalectic  verse;  4c  cata- 
lectic verse.  176.  4c  catalectic  verse.  178.  la  tidm;  Id  ihd,  §  175  ii. 
*180.  lc  bhard ;  2c  samsdyd\  3a  Rest  at  the  fifth  place.  *183.  2b 
tanu,  §  173  iii.  *184.  3a  heptasyllabic  verse.  185.  2b  nd  'not'  with 
hiatus.  *189.  3a  dhdmd  (plur.).  *190.  lb  tdpaso  'dhi  gives  a  better 
rhythm  than  tdpasa  ddhy;  3c  catalectic  verse.  *191.  4a  heptasyllabic 
verse. 


CORRIGENDA  AND  ADDENDA 

p.  14  1.  25,  etc.,  for  ' Bhargavd'  read  *  BhdryavV 
p.  30  1.  5  for  i  22  8d  read  i  122  8d. 
„     1.  10  add  i  79  5c. 
„     1.  11  for  viii  67  19a  read  viii  67  19c. 
p.  61  1.  11.     The  name  Pajra  also  occurs  in  viii  63  12c. 
p.  65  1.  29  for  44  1-3  read  44  1-13. 
p.  79  1.  16.     Omit  §  130  iii. 

p.  84  1.  4  from  bottom  of  page.     Omit  the  words  '  except  in  sdntya  '  good '.' 
p.  84  last  line,  and  p.  85  1.  1.     Omit  the  sentence  from  '  The  fact...'  to  '...reading.' 
p.  87  1.  6  from  bottom  of  page.     Add  navati  ii  18  6a,  saptati  ii  18  5d. 
p.  89  1.  9.     Add  vivie  x  49  11a.     Add  after  1.  11  :  svdh  '  tomorrow  ' :  more  usually 

sudh.     And  after  line  17  :  hydh  'yesterday,'  always  hidh. 
p.  101  1.  20.     For  dev&amp;n  gen.  pi.  add  ii  4  2d. 
p.   102  1.  5.     Add  ahian  ix  26  3a. 
p.  119  lines  5,  6,  and  7  for  '  long  '  read  '  short.' 
p.  125  1.  15  from  bottom  of  page,  for  '  §  172  i '  read  '  §  173  ii.' 
p.  126  1.  23  read  apuvrktd. 
p.  128  1.  25  for  '  heavy'  read  '  light.' 

p.  131  1.  25  for  '  §  170  ii '  read  '  §  168  ii,'  and  add  vtisisu  v  53  4a. 
p.  134  1.  16.     For  vti  u  add  i  105  2a. 
,,      1.29.     Add  u  sddah  *x  130  2c. 
p.  135  1.  3.     We  find  -u  long  with  hiatus  before  a  similar  vowel  in  i  39  2b  (2d). 

,,      1.  18.     viii  96  9d  has  -a  in  the  eighth  place,  not  the  ninth, 
p.  136  1.  15.     The  suffix  -iya  is  also  found  in  asuriya  (adj.),  which  is  required  in 

all  occurrences  (except  ix  71  2b)  for  asurya  of  the  text. 
p.  137  1.  19.     Also  dual  of  a  verb  in  -e  in  i  2  9c  (5). 

,,      1.  21.     But  indra-agni  occurs  vi  60  13a  (9). 
p.  141  line  12  from  bottom  of  page,  for  Hi  read  Ik. 
p.  142  1.  8.     Aufrecht  justifies  his  transliteration  in  his  Preface,  p.  6. 
p.  143  1.  16  for  i  120  15a  read  i  121  15a. 
p.  144  lines  20-22  are  to  be  deleted,  tdmmi  being  locative  singular  :  see  also  the 

Metrical  Commentary. 
p.  159.     Add  to  the  occurrences:  (i)  Long  fifth  syllable,  x  *141  3c,  143  6a;  (ii)  Short 

sixth  syllable,  i  2  8a3  9a3  9c,  *x  141  3a. 
p.  160.     (iii)  Trochaic  ending  :   omit  the  exx.  in  i  120,  and  add  v  19  5b,  vii  94  8b, 

viii  5  37a,  11  2c  ;   (iv)  Syncopated  ending,  add  v  19  3c;    (v)  Irregular  endings, 

add  viii  3  22a2,  17  14a1,  55  3b2,  56  5a. 
p.  161.     (i)  Catalectic  verses :   add  *x  152  5c ;    (ii)  Heptasyllabic  verses,  add  v  19 

5c  5d. 
p.  209  1.  3  for  '  apddm  '  read  ■  apdam.' 
p.  221.     §  234  iii  a.     The  metre  of  the  third  Mandala  has  been  carefully  analyzed 

by  A.  Meillet  (Journal  Asiatique,  Sept.-Oct.,  1897). 
In  addition  to  the  passages  here  referred  to  there  are  many  others  as  to  which  the 

views  expressed  in  the  body  of  the  work  are  modified  in  the  '  Metrical  Com- 
mentary '  (pp.  289—325). 


INDEX   OF  SUBJECTS 


The  references  are  to  the  pages.  Each  page  is  for  this  purpose  divided  into 
four  equal  parts,  denoted  respectively  by  the  letters  abed. 

The  arrangement  follows  the  English  alphabet :  but  in  the  case  of  Sanskrit 
words  the  special  symbols  used  are  arranged,  in  relation  to  the  nearest  English 
symbols,  in  the  order  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet.  Thus  the  whole  alphabet  employed 
in  this  index  is  as  follows :  a  a  b  c  d  d  e  e  f  g  h  h  i  i  j  k  11  m  m  m  n  ii  n  n  o  6  p  q  r  r 
sssftuwvwxyz. 

Names  of  metres  are  in  italics. 


Abhinihita  Sandhi  77c 

Adam  and  Eve  267d,  268 

Aditi  265b 

Agastya  61d,  267d 

Agnayah  265c 

Agni  265c ;  the  seven  Agni's,  ib. ;  Agni 

Jatavedas  55d,  56d;  Agni  Vaisvanara 

55d,  56d 
Ahura  Mazda  264b 
Amsa  263b 
Anukramanl's  2a 
Anustubh  7d ;  the   Atri  hymns  earliest 

170d;    in   the   Kanva    hymns    168d, 

169a;  in  the  cretic  period  169b;  the 

older  rhythm  in  the  popular  Kigveda 

168d;  Anustubh  triplets   235b.     See 

also  Epic  Anustubh 
Aorist.     Koot-aorist  31bcd;  a-aorist  32a 
Aramati  263b 
Archaic  period  104a,  187b 
Arnold,  E.  V.  x  b,  37a,  258c 
Art  in  Vedic  verse  19b ;   in  the  ritual 

264a 
Aryaman  261a 
Aryans  263d 
Asvina  261c,  263b,  266d 
Asti  219a 
Asceticism  267a 
Atharvaveda  25d,  58c 
Atidhrti  249c 
Atijagati  247b 
Atri  17c,  60bd,  64b 
AU/asti  8b,  171b,  220a,  237 ;  in  triplets 

234d 
Aufrecht,  Th.  ;  his  text  of  the  Kigveda 

142a,  290a 
Augment  with  long  quantity  129b 
Aurora  266b 
Avery,  J.  30d,  37d 
Avesta  19d,  174a,  226b 


Adityah  263ab 
Apah  57a 

Apriya  hymns  41b,  44c,  57a,  67  note, 
265a ;    originally    of    seven    stanzas 
_  only  242a 
Astarapankti  248b 

Bardic  period  17b 
Benfey,  Th.  xi,  xii,  140a,  296c 
Bhaga  263b,  264b,  265b 
Bharadvaja  17a,  61b,  62b 
Bhargavl  14c,  51b,  214a,   240d 

BLOOMFIELD,    M.    ix    C 

Bollensen,  0.  296b,  297a 

Brhaspati  56c,  266b 

Brhatl  8b,  66b ;  in  triplets  236d 

Brhati-Satobrhati  220a;  strophes  236 

Bradke,  P.  von  172d 

Brahmanaspati,  see  Brhaspati 

Break  lid,  183;  cretic  form  53d;  iambic 

forms  198,   199 ;  irregular  forms  200, 

201 
Brunnhofer,  H.  251a 

Cadence  10a,  lid,  12d;  of  dimeter 
verse  152a ;  of  Trochaic  Gayatrl  152d ; 
of  trimeter  verse  185 

Caesura  lie,  179-182;  secondary  189- 
191 ;  weak  191,  192 

Catalectie  Jagatl  207c 

Catalectic  verses  7c;  dimeter  161c 

Ceremonial  264c 

Chaldaean  deities  261a,  264b 

Chance,  laws  of  176c 

Charms  26d 

Combination  of  final  -a,  -a  72-74;  of 
final  -/,  -i,  -u,  -u  75,76;  of  duals  77d, 
78ab;  with  iva  78cd;  irregular  79ab 

Composite  hymns  8c 


328 


Index  of  Subjects 


Compounds,  treatment  of  final  vowels 
in  the  prior  element  120d,  121, 123-128 

Consecutive  short  syllables  in  dimeter 
verse  157,  158;  in  trimeter  verse 
195-197 

Contamination  15a,  20c,  53b,  257a 

Cosmogonies  27a 

Cretic  break  53d 

Cretic  period  18a 

Cretic  Tristubh  12c,  53c 

Dadhikra  56d 

Daksa  263b 

Daksina  57a 

Dawn,  see  Usas 

Danastuti  56b 

Decasyllabic  metres  178d,  227b 

Decasyllabic  Tristubh  178c,  227a,  257a 

Decasyllabic  verses  7d,  50,  51,  209-215 

Defective  verses  :  dimeter  162a;  trimeter 

210c 
Dhrti  249b 
Dimeter  Brhati  247c 
Dimeter  Kakubh  245d 
Dimeter  Puraumih  245d 
Dimeter  Usnih  162c 
Dimeter  verse  7b,  10,  11,  149-174 
Dionysus  266a 
Disease  39b 
Distich  71d 

Divodasa  17b,  64d,  169a,  253c 
Dlrghatamas  17c 
Duals  72d;  before  hiatus  137a 
Dvandva  duals  78b ;  with  caesura  180d ; 

derivatives  102cd 
Dvipadd   Gayatri  244c 
Dvipada  Jagatl  244d 
Dvipada  Satobrhati  244d 
Dvipada  Tristubh  51b,  244d 
Dvipadd  Virdj  8a,  14b,   51a,  239 
Dyaus  261d 
Dyava-Prthivl  56d,  265a,  266b 

Early  Caesura  lid,  67b 

Earth,  see  Prthivl  and  Dyava-Prthivl 

Eos  266b 

Epic  Anustubh  lib,  163b,  166,  167 

Extended  'Tristubh  208b 

External  Contamination  15b,  53b,  207-8 

External  form  8d 

Family  collections  16a 

Feminine  influences  267b 

Fifth  syllable,  in  dimeter  verse  159b; 

in  trimeter  verse  182d 
Final  Tristubh  verses  242d 
Final  vowels  (variant)  xi,  108-128 
Fire,  as  magic  260b;  as  messenger  to 

heaven  260d 
Foot  9c,  151b,  173c 

Gauh  265a 

Gauiami  212ab,  241b 

Gayatri  8a;  with  extra  verse  50b;  its 


history  171cd ;  triplets  235a.     See  also 

Trochaic  Gayatri 
Geldner,  Kakl  267c 
Genesis  268c 
Ghrta  265a 
Glosses  102b 

Gotama  17a,  61d,  65a,  253c 
Gotama  Nodhas  61c,  291c 
Grtsamada  17c,  61a 
Grassmann,  H.  x  d,  296d,  323a 

Havis  265a 

Heaven  260d,  261a.  See  also  Dyaus  and 
Dyava-Prthivl 

Heptasyllabic  verses  7c,  161d 

Heroic  dialect  24d,  106c 

Hiatus  70-80 ;  after  -a  72-74 ;  after  nd 
'  as  '  74b ;  after  sd  '  he '  74c  ;  after  -d 
74,  75  ;  denoted  by  m  72c ;  of  duals 
72d,  77a;  of  locatives  in  -a  73a; 
prevented  by  use  of  id,  lm  73b 

Homogeneous  groups  48 

Hybrid  verse  15d,  215d 

Hymn  8c 

Hypersyllabic  verses,  dimeter  16 Id ; 
trimeter  198a,  202a,  208d 

Iambic  reopening  52d,  167d 

Iambic  rhythm   in   trimeter   verse   9c, 

51c,    184c;    not    sought    in   dimeter 

verse  174a 
Iambic  Tristubh  12c 
Ictus    151c ;    borne   by   short   svllables 

156c,  205,  206 
Immortality  266a 
Indo-European  deities  262a 
Indra  261bc,  262c,  266b 
indra  verses  186c,  211c 
lndravajrd  184b 
Inspiration  260d 
Internal  Contamination  15c,  53c 
Internal  form  9a 
Irregular  cadence,  in  dimeter  verse  160c  ; 

in  trimeter  verse  204d,  205a 
Irregular     openings.     See    Consecutive 

short  syllables 

Jagatl    7d,    175-227;    catalectic    207c; 

with  Tristubh  stanzas  242c  ;  triplets 

241d 
Jamadagni  66b 
Jove  261d 

Kakslvat  64d,  67c 

Kakubh  8b,  235d,  236a 

Kanva  17a,  57c,  64ab,  220c,  254b 

Ksetrapati  56d 

KijHNAu,  E.  227d 

Kusika  17d,  66,  172b 

Kutsa  64d,  67c,  182c 

Lankan,  C.  B.  37a,  251a,  309d 
Late  Anustubh.     See  Epic  Anustubh 
Late  caesura  lid 


Index  of  Subjects 


viu 


Late  Rigveda  4a,  18c 

Linguistic  developemeut  257d,  258 

Linguistic  evidence,  28-41,  68cd  ;  within 

the  Kigveda  proper  25  2d 
Long  eleventh  syllable  204d 
Long  ninth  syllable  204cd;  in  Pentad 

hymns  239c 
Lopamudra  267d 

Ludwig,  A.  233b,  237b,  300d,  322d 
Lyric  metres  8a 

Macdonell,  A.  A.  265b 

Madhyejyotis  247a 

Magic  39b,  260b 

Mahabfhati  247d 

Mahdpadapankti  247c 

MaMpankti  8a,  55a,  169b,  248c 

Muliuxatobrhati  248a 

Marutah  261d,  263c 

Max  Muller,  F.  2  note 

Mamateya  63d,  220d 

Mana  or  Manya  17a,  61d,  253c,  263c,  296a 

Medhyatithi  64b 

Meillet,  A.  221a  (Addenda) 

Members  10a,  lid,  151c 

Metrical  Commentary  289-325 

Metrical  families  9a 

Metrical  pictures  252b,  256 

Mitra  261a,  265b ;  compared  with  Mithra 

263b 
Mitra- Varuna  56a,  265b 
Mitra-Varuna-Aryaman  263a 
Mixed  lyric  hymns  8b 
Monosyllabic  stems  30b 
Motor-cars  293d 
Mythological  hymns  26d,  266-268 

Nabhaka  65c 
Natives  of  India  263d 
Nabhanedistha  320d 
Neutral  rests  214,  215,  227c 
Nodhas.     See  Gotama  Nodhas 
Normal  dimeter  rhythm  153c 
Normal  period  17d 

Oldenberg,  H.  ix  d,  26c,  57b,  58b,  73b, 
143a,  263a,  295b,  300d,  303a,  308a 

Opening  10a,  lid,  12a;  of  dimeter  verse 
150d;  of  Epic  Anustubh  163b;  of 
trimeter  verse  182,   192-194 

Order  of  hymns  26b,  58b 

Padapankti  239d 
Pada-patha  5a 
Pajra   6ia  (also  Addenda) 
Paiikti  8a,  172c 
Pahcapada  Jagatl  248b 
Panayah  262c 
Par  j  any  a  56d 

Parts  (of  the  verse)  10a,  lie 
Pentad  hymns  239,  257a 
Pentad  opening  182d 
Pentad  strophes  239d 
Pentad  verses  213cd 


Perfect  forms  31ab 

Philosophical  poems  27a,  264a 

Pischel,  B.  888b 

Popular  dialect  24d 

Popular  Kigveda  18d,  22-46 

Position  before  A  h  ch  nn  m  Ih  141,  142 

Positions  of  Protraction  119a 

Pragatha  8b 

Praskanva  64b 

Prastdrapahkti  247a 

Pravargya  ceremony  43d 

Pratisakhya's  2a 

Pre-Vedic  verse  174a,  225b 

Priests,  originally  craftsmen  260c 

Pnyamedha  60d,'  64b 

Protraction  119a,   146a;  in  the  second 

place  of  trimeter  verse  197a;   in  the 

eighth  place  203d 
Proverbs  27a 
Purarhdhi  263b 
Purastudbrhatl  231d,  246c 
Purausnih  245c 
Purumilha  60d 
Puriiravas  267c 
Pilsan  44c,  261d 

Quantitative  evidence  3d,  109 
Quantitative  restoration  108-148 
Quantity   not    determined    by   position 
157b 

Rbhavah  266c 

Reduplication  128b 

Refrain  verses  57d 

Reopening  of  Epic  Anustubh  11a 

Resolution  of  root-stems  104c,  106d 

Restoration  of  text  5b,  81—148 

Rests  13d,  209-215 

Riddles  27a 

Rigveda  proper  4b 

Ritual,  its  origin  260bc 

Ritual  hymns  57a 

Rudra  263c 

Sakvari  247d 
Sloka  lib 
&amp;unahotra  61a 
Syavasva  17a,  60bd 

Sadasaspati  56d 

Samhita  text  xi,  5a,  71a,  137-141 

Sandhi  70-80 

SarasvatI  56b 

Satobrhati  8b,  236d 

Savitar  263b,  264b,  265b 

Secondary  caesura  180b,  190,  191,  221a 

Semicadence  of  Epic  Anustubh  11a 

Short  eighth  syllable  185c,'  202-204 

Short  sixth  syllable  159cd,  160a 

Short  syllables  bearing  the  ictus  205,  206 

Short  tenth  syllable  185d,  204 

Shortening  of  final  long  vowels  145b 


330 


Index  of  Subjects 


Sieg,  Emil  267d 

Sindhu  67b 

Skandhogrivi  246a 

Sobhari  17a,  59c,  64b 

Soma  260c 

Soma  Pavamana  hymns  16b,  65d,  254c, 

266a 
Stanza  7d 
Strophes  235-237 
Strophic  period  104a 
Surya  56d,  265c 
Syllaba  anceps  181a 
Syllabic  measurement  19d 
Syllabic  restoration  81-107 
Sympathetic  magic  260b 
Syncopated  cadence   in    dimeter   verse 

160c;   in  trimeter  verse  205a 
Syncopated    opening  in    dimeter  verse 

150d;  in  Trochaic  Gayatri  163a;  in 

trimeter  verse  182d 
Syncopation  10b 

Table  of  hymns  269-288 

Trimeter  verse  7c,  11-13,  175-227 

Tripada  Jagati  245c 

Tripada  Trutubh  245b 

Triplets  234b 

Tristubh  7d,  20c;  in  triplets,  etc.  241d, 

242ab 
Trochaic  Anw&lt;tubh  53a 
Trochaic  Brhatl  53a 
Trochaic  cadence  in  dimeter  verse  160b, 

172a 
Trochaic  Gayatri  10c,  53a,  165 

Unaugmented  forms  30d 
Uneven  lyric  8c,  164d,  229-234 
/ "jHtrixtaribrhati  247c 
Uparistajjyotis  236d,  247a 
Upastiita  59c,  64b 


UrvaSl  267c 

USana  64d 

Usas  261d,  265a,  266b 

Usasa-nakta  266b 

Umih  8b;  in  triplets  234d 

Vala  262c 

Variant  final  vowels  xi-xiii,  108-128 

Varuna    261a,    264b,    265b.     See    also 

Mitra- Varuna 
Vasistha  17a,'62d,  63,  220cd,  265bc 
Vatsa  64b 
Vac  265a 

Vamadeva  64d,  218c 
Vayu  56b,  262d 
Vastospati  56c 
Vdsisthl  181b,  189 
Verrall,  A.  W.  192a 
Verses  of  four  syllables  162 
Vimada  17a,  60c,  64b,  67c,  170d 
Viparita  246b 
Viraj  8a,  51b,  245b 
Viratsthfuid  14a,  51b,  64b,  211,  240c 
Virupa  60d,  64b 
ViSvamitra  66b 
VifamSpadd  246c 
n'starapankti  236d,  246b 
Visnu  56b,  265d 
Vocalis  ante  vocalem  134d 
Vrtraghna  262c,  263c 
Vyasva  17a,  59c 

Wackernagel,  J.  106d,  146ab 
Weak  caesura  191b 

Yahveh  264b 

Yama  and  YamI  267d,  268 

Zetfs  261d 

ZuBATf,  J.  xii,  140a 


SANSKRIT   INDEX 


The  transliteration  follows  the  forms  which  appear  in  the  Samhita  text,  restored 
forms  being  added  where  this  seems  required  within  brackets. 


a-  initial  77bc 

-a  final  with  hiatus  72-74 

-a  voc.  dual  137c 

-a,  -a  neut.  pi.  113c 

-a,  -a  2  sing.  impv.  xiii,  113 

-a,  -a  3  sing.  pf.  120a 

-aam  gen.  pi.   lOlcd 

-ami  142b 

dccha,  dccha  112c,  142a 

dtha,  dthd  112c,  140b 

dtho  (dthd)  132d 

adds  38b 

adyd,  adyd  117a,  140d 

ddlui,  dcihd  117c,  140d 

ddha  ydd  140d 

-an  stems  88c,   130c 

-ann  locative  and  vocative  142b 

•ann  2,  3  sing.  142b 

-anta  37b 

dntja  (dnia)  84b 

dpd  126c 

dpo  (dpa)  133d 

dpya  (dpia)  84b 

abhiyuj  126c 

abhi  (abhi)  126d 

arista  (dr-)  127a 

arydh  (aridh)  lOOd 

•av  locative  131a 

•av  vocative  132b 

dvidhat  129b 

dvrnak  (a-)  129b 

dv'ria  (d-)  126d 

asdnyd  (-i)  87d 

asydm  (4dm)  96c 

diva  (diua)  94d 

dsvavant  127d 

dsat  (dsat)  127a 

dsan  (dsan)  303a 

-asi  30c 

-ase  (inf.)  32b 

asuryd  (asuryd)  83c,  136b  (Addenda) 

asmdbhyam  (-bhya)  30a 

asme  136d 

asmai  136d 

r//j«,   a/u7  114c 

dhobhih  (dhabhih)  294d 


-a  final  with  hiatus  74,  75  ;    quantity 
134c;  developed  to  -o,  -du  135b,  145d 
•a  u  131d,  134ab,  and  Addenda 
•a  (-aa)  noun-suftix  90 
-a  instrum.  sing.  28d 
-a  locative  29c,  73a 
-a  dual,  combined  77d,  78a 
-a  (-aa)  verb-suffix  91 
-a  2  sing.  impv.  113d,  140c 
-a  1  sing.  perf.  112c 
-a  2  plur.  perf.  112c 
-at  (-aat)  99d 
-dtama  29b 
-dtara  29b 
-utdm  (-atdm)  130a 
-ate  (-ate)  130a 
-dtliam  (-athdm)  130a 
-a*7i£  (-athe)  129d 
-a nam  (-an am)  130c 
&lt;7a7tyd  99c,  106a 
-a;ti  (1  p.   sing,  subj.)  37c 
-am  (-aam)  gen.  pi.  92,  93,  106d 
-dya  (gerund)  112c,   113a,  140c 
dyuh  (dyu)  142d 
dyeji  (dyaje)  144a 
-ayya  30c 
-dr  (-aar)  99d 
-dv  131d 
avar  (dvar)  129b 
dvidhyat  129b 
awm  129b 
-&lt;7*'  (-aas)  92ab 
a's^  38a 
dxlh  38a 
a'sAra  (dsakra)  101a 

-*,  -I  instr.  29b,  112c,  113b 

-i,  -I  neut.  pi.  113c 

-inn  142b 

(d  73b 

indra  (Indara)  98bc,   106a 

Indravant  127d 

-inn  (-&lt;»)  locative  and  vocative  142b 

iydm  (ydm)  101b 

'irya  (Ma)  84b 

iva  ('ua)  68b,  78cd 


332 


Sanskrit  Index 


-isya  fut.  37d 

-i  before  hiatus  134c,  136ab 

•  i  instr.  sing.  29b,  113b 

-I  dual,  combined  78ab 

-ithdm  (ithdm)  130a 

\m  (t,  i)  73b,  142d 

-Iman  30c 

Udna  (isdna)  142d 

w,  3  115c,  140d 

-u,  -u  neut.  pi.  29d,  113c,  114b 

u  lokd  115c 

-ui,  -ui  loc.  112c,  113b 

utd  (utd)  133c 

lipo  (upa)  133d 

uruvydc  143a 

urviyd  (uruyd)  142d 

usdsam,   ustisam,  etc.  130b 

ii  115c,  140d 

-«  before  hiatus  134c,  136c 

-u  neut.  pi.  29d,  113c 

fi  jananta  134c 

a  juvah  134c 

fl  fdda$  134c  (Addenda) 

-urn  Ui  132c 

-e  dual,  combined  78b 

etdd  38b 

-&lt;?te  (-ate)  130a 

-effce  (-af/ie)  130a 

-ena,  -end  120b 

?/u7  112c,   140b,  305d 

end  112c,  113c,  140b 

evd,  evd  73b,  112c,  140b 

■aih  adv.  ending  38b 

-o  (-«)  vocative  131bc 
-o  Ui  132c 
dsadhi  40a 

-au  dual  37a,  132b 

m  141d,  142c 

ih  denoting  hiatus  72d 

m  6d,  141d,  142c 

h  6d,  141d,  142c 

kavyd  (kan'ui)  83d 
klla,  kild  112c 
krdhl,  krdht  118b,  141a 
Una,  Una  120d,  141a 
krdtuna,  (krdtud)  88a 
kriyasma  306a 
/cvo   (/ctfa,  fat)  101b 

gddhya  (gddhia)  84b 
aa"/&gt;  (gdah)  90c 
jiaffl  (gdam)  90c 
giihya  (giihia)  84c 


ao/j  (gdvah)  90d 
gdjata  (gdvajdta)  90d 
gopithya,  gavapithia  90d 
gdmdn  (gdvamdn)  90d 

o/ta,  ofta  112c 

cardthd  143a 
carkftya  (-tia)  84c 
cyautnd  (cyautand)  99a 

ccfc  141d 

cchardih  (cchadih)  143a 

jdnya  (jdnia)  84b 
j'a/u,  ja/if  118b 
jig'tvdifis  143a 
jya'  ( jia')  •  bow  '  89a 
j?/a  (j/a)  'strength'  97a 
jydkd  (jidkd)  'bow '89a 
jyestha  91d 
jj/oA-  (jirffc)  89a 

?  36d 

nd  36d 

-fa,  -fa  2  plur.  xiii,  113c,  114a 

-tana,  -tana  113c 

tanvah  (tanuah)  83d 

tanve  (tanue)  83d 

-Mwe  32a 

•tort,  -tori  112c 

tacasya  (-yd)  83d 

tava  w  134b 

tdtisydh  (tdviseh)  131c 

tdsmai  136d 

-f/,  -fi  instrum.  112c,  113b,  140b 

tu,  tu   115a,  140d 

tubhya,  tubhyam  30a 

tuvimaghd  125b 

fr%a  (tritfya)  143b 

fWM  142a 

fr.N//,  fr.su  114c 

fe'wa,  fi?za  120d,  141a 

-tai  3  sing.  subj.  37c 

tyd  (tid)  97c 

-ft/a  (-tia)  after  light  syllable  84 

-tyd  (-tid)  gerund  95b,  112c,  140c 

-tra,  -trd  120c,  141a 

trt  114c 

tredhd  (trayidhd)  89a 

tva  (tua)  97a 

-taa  (-fwa)  88d,  94d 

-tvana  30c 

tadf  (tudt)  97a,  105d 

to&lt;fm  (tudm)  85d,  105b 

taam  (torfm)  85d,  86c 

tvdyd  (tudya)  97b,  105d 

tva  (tud)  85d 

tad  (fad)  95b,  100c 

-tva  {-tud)  gerund  29d,  38a,  95b 

tvd-  (tud-)  86c 

-tvl  (-tui)  gerund  95b 


Sanskrit  Index 


388 


tve  (tue)  17&amp;,  85d,  86c,  136d 

-tha,  -thd  2  plur.  113,  114,  140c 
-tha,  -thd  2  sing.  perf.  120a 
-thana,  -thana  113c 

ddbhya  (ddbhia)  84b 

ddmya  (ddmia)  84b 

das  (das)  143b 

das  (das)  143b 

dasvdihs  (ddsudihs)  95a 

ddsa  (ddasa)  100a 

ddsvat  (dadsvat)  92a 

dasvdms  (ddsudihs)  95a 

dive-dive  29d 

divyd  (divid)  84c 

df'dyaZ  (didiat)  88d 

didyana  (dtdiana)  88d 

d?dae  (dldie)  91c 

didhyat  (didhiat)  88d 

didhydna  (dldhiana)  88d 

didhye  (didhie)  91c 

durya  (duria)  84b 

&lt;ta?-a  (daard)  100a 

dWM  142a 

deydm  (da-idm)  91b 

devdvant  127d 

devavt,  devdvi  125c,  136b 

devdhutya  (-ti)  87d 

d&lt;?van  gen.  pi.  101b  (and  Addenda) 

destha  (ddyistha)  91d 

d«snd  (dayimd)  92a 

dwa»i  (didm,  dydam)  90cd,  97b 

d?/n&lt;  (dia£)  100c 

dyaiih  (diauh)  97b 

dt;a  (dna)  89a 

dvi/i  (da?/?)  97b 

dhdnya  (dhdnia)  84b 

dhanv  (dhanu)  96d 

dhdnvan  (dhdnuan)  96d 

-rfM,  -dM  imperv.   118d,  141c 

dheydm  (dha-iam)  91b 

dhestha  (dhdyistha)  91d 

-d%ai  32b 

-dhvam  (-dhuam)  94c,   100c 

-dnt&gt;e  (-rf/iue)  94c 

-dhvai  (-dhuai)  94c 

nd  'as'  combined  74b 

na  'not'  with  hiatus  73cd,  74ab 

-fia  (-ana)  97,  99 

-na/i  (•ana$)  88c 

ndma  astu  40b 

ndrya  (ndria)  84b 

ndvyasyd  (ndvyasl)  87d 

nani,  naM  139c 

-na,-ni  stems :  preceding  vowel  short  131c 

ndsatya  99b,  106a 

na,  n-n  115a,  140d 

nu  (nuu  or  nu  u)  100a 

na  ci«  112c 

nrndm  (nrndm)  143b 

-ne  (-ane)  88c 


netdr  (nayitdr)  91c 
n^aw  (nmii.&lt;,i),i)  91c 
nd  (nd)  133a 

liaiih    {iiaiuih)    90d 

-nn  141d 

-nya  (-nia)  after  light  syllables  84 

-p  causatives  38a 

pdnthdm  (pdnthaam)  90d 

pavitdr  (pavitdr)  143b 

pasavya  83d 

pdntam  (pdantam)  91b 

pdvakd  (pavdkd)  143b 

pitrdh  (pitardh)  88b 

pipdya  (pipdya)  128d 

ptpydna  (pipiana)  88d 

pipy  and  (pipiana)  88d 

purutdma  124b 

purubhuj  124b 

purma  (purusa)  143c 

i&gt;aru  114d 

purudhd,  purudhd  112c 

par  100b 

pusan  142b 

prihivf  (prthvl)  101b 

prthivydm  136b 

jprajtf  40c 

pratlvydm  136b 

prdmatya  (prdmati)  87d 

prestha  (prdyistha)  88d,  92a 

_prri  (|wd  w)  132c,  134a 

barhimd  143c 

brhaddivd,  brhdddiva  143c 

brhddbhih  (brhdbhih)  143c 

6Ms  (6nads)  92b 
bMsvat  (bhadsvat)  92b 
onuwa  139b 

-fenna/j  (-bhiah)  93d,  94 
-bhydm  (-bhidm)  93d,  94 

-ma,  -ma  1  p.  plur.  119d 

-maife  vocative  29d 

maksu  114c 

maghavann   142b 

maghonah   90d,  127c 

maghdnoh   90d 

mddya  (madia)   84c 

mddhva  fern,  (mddhud)  88a 

-wan  stems  88c,   130c 

manusya  (manusia)  83d 

waai  37b 

mdrta  (mdrtia)  101c 

mahdnt:  forms  mahdnah,  niaininn, 

hdbhih  143d 
mahdm  29b 

mahind  88c,  100c,  143d 
mahimnd  88c,  101c 
ma  find  88c 
tiuihya,  mdhyam  30a 
-md  1  plur.  perf.   112c 
mil trnh  (ma tat  oh)  88b 
mddhvt  (mddhui)  95a 


334 


Sanskrit  Index 


mtim  (mdam)  100b 
7)i&gt;  thu  114c 

mllhvtfms  (milhudms)  95a 
tnrl  (mfl)  _143d 
mrlikd  (mrlikd)  143d 
memyat  (memiat)  88d 
mo  (md  u)  133a 
-mnah  (-manah)  88c 
•mna  (-mand)  88c 

-y  stems  30c 

-ya  (-ia)  noun-suffix  84,  85cd,  lOOd 

-yd  (-la)  noun -suffix  83d 

-ya  verb- suffix  95a,  100c 

-yah   (-iah)   lOOd 

yajhanyam  (-nfyam)  136b 

yajhlya  83d 

yddi,  yddi,  117d,   140d 

yavyti  (y arty ti)  84b,   136b 

ydsmin  (ydsmi)  144a 

ydsmai  136d 

-yd  (-to)  noun-suffix  84,  lOOd 

-ya  (-»7)  noun-suffix  83d 

-yd  (-id)  instrum.  sing.  87 

-yd  (-id)  optative  96c 

-yd  (-id)  gerund  95b,  112c,  140c 

-yah  (-idh)  37a,  95d 

yatdh   (yaatdh)  91c 

yati  (yaati)  91c 

-yam  (-iam)  locative  37a,  96a 

yayam  (yayidm)  91c 

//»./&gt;«  (U"ji«)  84b 

yuyudhdh  129a 

yitnitydh   (yuvateh)  131c 

yimne  136d 

yena,  yend   120d,  141a 

yestha   92a 

-r/at  (-ia/)  dative  37a,  95d 

■yoh  (-ioh)  87 

-ra  (-ara)  97-99 

rdnya  (rdnia)  84c 

rdf/ta  (rdthas)  101c 

-ratha  125c 

rdthya   (rdthia)  84c 

rdjann  142b 

rudrd  (rudard)  98d,  106a 

reknah  (rdyiknah)   100b 

reknah  (rekanah)  99a 

rai:  cases  formed  from  the  stem  rajfi-  87b 

rddasoh  101c 

rddasyoh  (rddasiyoh)  136b 

Z  37a 

1$  141d 

-ra  (-«a)  94d,  lOOd 

-vaj[i  (-ua$)  100d 

-rah  vocative  29d 

-rat  32c 

-van  stems :  ace-  vanam  130c 

-vane  32b 

vavdna  306  a 


vasavya  (vasavyd)  83c 

-rasu  125b 

vdsudhiti  124c 

vasurdc  124c 

vasuvid  124d 

vdstu,  loc.  vdstav  131a 

-rd  (-ad)    ins.tr.   sing.    88a;    after   light 

syllables  101a 
-ra?Hs  (-wawts)  95a 
rata  (vdata)  92b 
vdtdpya  (vaatdpya)  100b 
ram  (uaam)  100b 
-ram  (-warn)  96a 
»*&gt;  (rdar)  100a 
ra'si  131c 

vdsimant  (vdsi-)  128a 
vibhvdsdh  124d 
visvddha,  visvddha  112c 
visvdha,  visvdhd  112c 
visvdha  (visvdhd)  112c,  130d 
-rl  (-z«)  95a 
rr/'  126b 
-rrta  126b 
-iTdft  125b 
vrsann   142b 

vfsdnam  (vr*anam)  130d 
-w&gt;$  (-ho/?)  dual  88a 
-rna/i  (-rana/f)  88c 
-tme  (-vane)  88c 
rydnti  (vidnti)  89a 

fcbya   (sdsia)  84b 
iaivddibham  199b,  201d,  305d 
shnictutt  (ximivant)   127d 
Itrto'  114c 
sura  (sdura)  100b 
snnidhi,  srnudht  118b 
.srim/if  118b,  141a 
«c  initial  144b 
s//a?  (sj'flf)  91c 
smdsru  (smd.Sdru)  101c 
srdtya  (srtitia)  84c 
sntdhi,  srudhi  118b,   141a 
sre'rc?  (srdyini)  89a 
srestha  (srdyntha)  92a 
ii'dA  (sud/?)  89a  (Addenda) 
.srdn  (foonj  95c 

sd  'he'  combined  74c 

sakhyd  (sakhid)  84c 

sakhydh   (sakhidh)  lOOd 

sdptivant  (sdptivant)  127d 

•sriVra  38b 

sasavdihs  (sasanvdihs)  144b 

sdsmin  (sdsmi)  144b 

-sd/j  125c  :    ace.  -sdham  130c 

sahasdvann  lOld,  142b 

sddhu,  sddlw  114d 

•«a}uf  32a 

sonw  (s/id)  101c 

sano  (sdnav)  131a 

sasdha  (sasdha)  129a 

si  'bind':  stem  sia-  95b 

sd,  su  116cd,  140d 


Sanskrit  Index 


885 


sudds  (sudads)  92a 
sumatyd  (sumatt)  87d 
sumnayu,  mmnayu  128b 
suvdnd  (svdnd)  89b 
sfnjavasa  (su-)  127b 
sura  (sriura  or  stfruz)  100b 
st1n/a  (suri'a)  85b 
-se  1  pers.  sing.  31a 
-se  infinitive  32b 
-sai  subjunctive  37c 
stavdn  (sdtvd)  144c 
sma,  smd  112c,  140c 
syd  (sid)  32c,  97c 
-sya  future  37d 
sydm  (sid)n)  96c 
sydma  (sidma)  96c 
syond  (siond)  89a 
svd  (sud)  97c 


-sva,  -*va  (sua,  -sua)  Mc 
-*va,  -*va  112c,  113a,  120b, 
svad  (mud)  95c 
8var  (suar)  83b 
svardj  (svardjd)  102a 
svarga  (xitaryd)  89a 
svasrdh  (svasarnh)  88b 
svdhd  265d 

-fcan  125d 

hdvya  (hdvia)  84c 

havyd  84a 

-to,'  -M  118cd,  141a 

hiydnd  (hydnd)  102a 

hiranydyd  (-ydyi)  87d 

hrdya  (hfdia)  84b 

%aft  (Atrffc)  89b  (Addenda) 


Mi). 


CAMBRIDGE  :     PRINTED    BY   JOHN    CLAY,    M.A.    AT   THE    UNIVERSITY   PRESS. 


%, 


CM 

O 


I 


&amp; 

H 
0) 
&gt; 


1 

SCO 
-P 

*  o 

H  T&gt;      • 


* 


T5 

0) 

m  &gt; 

aJ  en 
CO  v*v 

h3  &lt; 


1    — ,_,.._.. 

^^ 

1 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

LIBRARY 

I 

k 

ft 
u 

0 

DO  NOT            // 

PC 

o 

CO 

V* 

REMOVE        / 

fc 

c 
V 

&lt; 

2 

THE                1 
CARD            | 
FROM             ^ 

4 

I 

THIS                \ 

^ 

POCKET             \, 

to       r» 
Q       — 

1 

. 

</pre>